ketogenics was something it really was
transformational and as I discovered
ketogenics through you I'm very curious
to hear um you no longer feel the same
that you did what
changed well it's a broader topic I
think around that of dietary restriction
so I think my aperture has just widened
significantly so you have to take a step
way back and ask the question how does
one what are the ways in which one can
change their diet so let's come back to
your example in a moment
because I think if I recall when you
went on a ketogenic diet it wasn't in an
effort to lose weight no yeah so let's
put your case aside for a moment and
instead discuss it through the lens of
how most people think about ketogenic
diets vegan diets pick your diets it's
it's usually some form of energy
restriction so I think initially I was
like most people are pretty myopic about
my views of energy
restriction and over time that thinking
evolved into saying look there are
really broadly speaking three strategies
to reduce intake one strategy is to just
directly fixate on the reduction of
energy intake that's called caloric
restriction so bodybuilders are a great
example of this right like they really
really know how to weigh and measure
every single thing they're eating and
they certainly understand during an
anabolic phase this is how much energy I
need during a catabolic phase or cutting
phase I need this much and they've got
this down to a science and it's really
remarkable I mean it but it's a science
optimized for the reduction of fat
that's right that's right and
maintenance of muscle that's exactly
right longevity right for anybody abely
so so but but let's be clear like I
don't think there's a better example of
any type of person on the planet that's
figured out how to control intake up and
down and to produce a perfect result
with respect to that aesthetic MH well
said and for most people that's really
hard to do um it's hard to do because
you can't really ignore it like you
can't just eat without thinking you
always have to be paying attention to
what you're doing but it is the most
direct way to go about getting the
result you want so that's method one
method two
says how about I don't pay attention to
what I'm eating or when I'm eating um
but I pay attention pardon me how about
I don't pay attention to what I'm eating
or uh how much I'm eating but I just pay
attention to when I eat so that's called
time restriction people call that
intermittent fasting and if I make the
window in which I eat small
enough um I will reduce energy intake in
total so if I said to you you you know
you can only have one meal a day chances
are you are going to lose weight um now
people thought that well there must be
something magical about intermittent
fasting beyond the caloric reduction but
that turns out to not be the case it's
been tested in several uh studies now
and it's clear that if you eat 2,000
calories in one sitting it's no better
or worse for you uh at least from a
weight perspective than if you eat 2,000
calories spread out of the course of a
day it's probably worse for you in
another way though which is you're a
little more likely to lose muscle mass
because you won't be able to get the
right amount of amino acids into your
MUSC I I don't want to derail your point
but we are going to have to talk about
autophagy CU I intermittent fast like a
fiend great back 365 yeah okay so then
we get to the third method of caloric
reduction which is the use of what's
called dietary restriction so here we
pick things within the diet and we cut
them out and the more restrictive that
is the more likely it is to produce an
energy reduction and therefore the more
likely you are to achieve the goal of
weight loss so the glib example I always
give is if you went on the no lettuce
diet you would not lose an ounce right
right it's simply not restrictive enough
if you went on the only potato diet you
would lose an insane amount of weight
you simply couldn't eat enough potatoes
to maintain now the that's not a healthy
diet right no one would think that the
all potato diet is going to produce an
ideal Health outcome but you will lose a
lot of weight right so keto is simply a
very for a restrictive form of that diet
and many people lose a lot of weight on
a ketogenic diet because they are
limiting so many things right they're
limiting so many carbs it's also for
many people much more satiating so it
actually readily reduces their hunger
and so they simply don't want to eat
more so they have fewer food choices and
they don't want to eat as much but you
can gain weight on a ketogenic diet if
you eat a lot you have to be careful
because you're generally eating more
energy-dense Foods on a ketogenic diet
and I've seen lots of people blow up on
ketogenic diets because they somehow
think it's a license to eat as much fat
as they want not the case so now let's
talk about so so that's that sort of
coming to that conclusion made me
realize oh well there's nothing really
magical about any particular diet when
it comes to energy
balance but now each of these diets has
their own trade-offs around other
metrics of health so for example we
talked about the importance of protein
protein is I think the most important of
the macronutrients I know everybody
wants to argue about fat and carbs but I
think the the game is one and lost with
protein and you know the recommended
dietary allowance of protein is
unfortunately very low so there's most
people are being told to eat 08 grams
per kilogram of body weight and that's
literally half what you need to be
eating whoa yeah that's the amount of
protein for body mass that I carry or
ideal body mass total body weight hm
yeah so if I at 6 foot weighed 250 lb
I'm going to be wanting to eat something
like 1.6x that in protein in kilograms
so yeah so if you were if you weighed if
you were whatever 200 lb I would want
you
consuming at least 60 g of protein and
maybe closer to 200 depending on your
demand and depending on your age and
depending on the type of protein you're
getting so a lot of different diets
let's pick two that I think one has to
be they're doable but you have to be
careful about getting enough protein so
let's start with a plant-based diet so
plant-based diet by definition you can't
have any animal protein so all of a
sudden you're doing away with the best
form of amino
acids you know one could argue that when
we eat animals or animal protein it is a
more pure synthesis of the amino acids
that are coming from Plants right so
like a cow all it's eating is plant but
you eat a cow or like venison is one of
my favorite things right so I'm eating
wild venison from Hawaii that only eats
grass and yet it's the richest source of
amino acids I can sink my teeth into in
other words its digestive system its
metabolism is doing this remarkable
thing I can't do which is turning grass
into the richest densest source of
protein if I want to go back and eat the
grass it's fine but I just have to
acknowledge I'm going to have to eat a
lot more of it because it's not a great
source of protein so the
bioavailability of plant protein is
about 70% that of animal protein and
it's not as rich in the most important
amino acids so when we have patients who
are plant-based and they say oh do I
have to give up my plant-based diet I
say not necessarily um and if it's
working for you in all other ways other
than this then there's a workaround here
but the workaround requires you being
very deliberate about your protein
quantity another example is you so we're
going to come back to the case that you
just said which is what about people who
are imminently fasting do they have to
you know is that a bad thing is that a
good thing well it depends but if a
person is intermittently fasting you're
going to see a lot of muscle loss unless
they're very thoughtful about their
protein intake so you know if a person's
intermittently fasting
168 you can generally get away with it
cuz in 8 hours you can get usually at
least three good servings of protein but
we have a lot of people who are
intermittently fasting and they're only
eating two meals no snacks they can't
come close to getting the right amount
of protein in because you can't have
let's just say you're on the 160 gram a
day program 80 grams twice in your day
is not going to cut it because you can't
put 80 gram to work it's too much
protein for the body
Peter man this is so different than how
I live well no but think about it like
bodybuilders are very thoughtful of this
right if you look at bodybuilders
thought we debunked all the like six
meals a day and you're saying no like I
actually do need to break it back up in
smaller piece if you're optimizing for
muscle mass yes and it can't be too
small so this is where it gets really
crazy if you're eating really small
amounts of protein like 20 grams at a
time you're not going to get muscle
protein synthesis because the liver is
going to the liver basically takes first
dibs on the protein and goes
glucogenesis it's just going to make
glucose out of protein so if you just
trickle tiny amounts of protein in
you're not getting muscle protein
synthesis I'm turning it into glucose
really inefficient process yeah you're
just the liver is turning it into
glucose if you eat tons of protein and
the limit based on the literature seems
to be somewhere between 40 and 50 grams
in one sitting okay once you exceed 40
to 50 grams in one sitting the excess
just goes into glucogenesis
huh wow okay this is very very fasc so
if you're trying to get 140 gr a day you
really need to optimize it by 4 * 40 and
uh wow okay so amazing this is amazing
I'm always game to change uh okay so I'm
breaking my protein up 4x400 if 160 is
my goal what period of time do I need to
put between them because I would be
happy to do that like it I'm I what's
your feeding window what do you like to
eat when to when man I I usually keep it
tight like four 5 hours max okay so if
you really want to do it that way then
you're going to have to
have snack if I need to well but but but
I'm saying like if that's working for
you from a weight management standpoint
and a total caloric I'm a freak of
discipline I will never accidentally
gain weight you don't have to worry
about that with me what you have to
worry about with me is right now I
believe that autophagy is necessary to
avoid cancer I don't want to die of
cancer so I intermittent fast to make
sure that I'm in autophagy but there's
no evidence that 20 hours of fasting is
sufficient to induce autophagy yeah see
I thought there was man I thought
autophagy kicked in at like 15 16
hours uhhuh but mice will die in 3 days
of not eating well that's bad yeah so in
other words like we're just it's apples
to oranges we have no I mean do we know
where it kicks in for humans no because
we don't have biomarkers for autophagy
uhuh my intuition which might be as
useful as a warm bucket of hamster vomit
is that it's probably three to five days
3 to four days maybe do you do any
prolong fasting I don't anymore wow um
and I'm not opposed to it like I would
probably still do you know if you were
diagnosed with cancer what would you
do yeah I would
probably get back to fasting more
evidence-based or just throwing
everything at
mechanistic yeah give me the mechanism
uh meaning deprivation of growth factors
yeah very interesting also selective
sensitization of cancer versus
non-cancer cells during chemo right so
there is some evidence from volter
Longo's work that when you're undergoing
chemotherapy doing so in a caloric
deficit can be beneficial because the
cancer cell is differentially and
disproportionately stressed by caloric
restriction and than the normal cell and
therefore you're cuz remember chemo like
the magic of chemo is not that it kills
cells or kills cancer cells it's that it
selectively kills cancer cells anything
can kill a cancer cell it's how do you
kill a cancer cell and not a regular
cell so how do you how do you enhance
the spread between those two and it
might be that caloric restriction is a
way to do it and it renders the cancer
cell even more susceptible and at the
same time that hitting it with chemo it
becomes uh more likely to die at the
expense of the healthy cell that's
that's the mechanism and there is some
data to suggest that that's the
case Okay so uh autophagy we know is
going to kick in at much long we hope is
kicking in at much longer periods uh
deprivation can still help with cancer
from a growth factor remember you also
kick in autophagy with exercise so if
you're looking for another absolutely
what what is autophagy right autophagy
selfing well yes yes yes but what it's
occurring in nutrient absence mhm and
there's a great way to induce cellular
energy reduction which is exercise when
you exercise cellular energy goes down
that's why exercise increases kinas
activity just as fasting does H so we
you you don't want to underestimate the
benefit of exercise in tricking the cell
into thinking it's nutrients are scarce
okay then what kind of exercise I'm
going to guess it has to be the kind
that I hate the most and if V2 Max is
the under the curve revealer uh it's
what we were talking about very high
intensity period of rest very high
intensity well that's how you train V2
Max but that is what I have to do no
because that's only that's that should
only be 20% of your cardio volume 80% of
your cardio volume Should Be steady
state uhhuh and moderate intensity okay
the 80% I like that a lot better
interesting that's zone two as we call
it and that's done at a level where you
could carry out a conversation if you
had to but you don't want to right
that's the that's the litmus test that
is a perfect description okay so uh
going back to protein so maybe in fact
no you're you're saying just flat out
the intermittent fasting is probably not
helping you at all and if anything it's
probably making it hard for you to get
protein and spare your muscle uh you
need to spread this out you spoke in
kilograms which really threw me off
that's okay how much do you weigh in
pounds uh 185 Okay so
160 to 180 gram per day so four meals at
40 to 45 gam is perfect for you okay
spread out over ideally as long as
possible and to be clear these don't
have to be meals like two of my four 45
grams of protein that's a [__] meal
it's not though think about it like what
is that 200 calories it's like a chicken
breast it's yeah that I mean you don't
consider that a meal that's a rounding
error um no for me like I'm doing I'll
do like I have these venison sticks that
are 10 like a little jerky venison
bought or made uh they're actually now
bought you can now buy them I like that
okay um so each one is 10 uh grams of
protein MH and 50 calories and I will
have five of those as a snack there's 50
grams of protein right there with 250
calories like it's nothing okay what
about are they highly processed anything
to avoid there no problem because
they're made
they're made byy that I'm involved in so
I mean I love it the most obviously as a
guy that only gets involved with things
that I care about think are real so
called Maui venison okay these are um
this a type of deer called Axis deer
that are invasive to the state of Hawaii
and so they're harvested there in the
most Humane manner fashionable which is
what allows the animal to be completely
stress-free so they're harvested by
sniper at night under night vision and
whoa yeah so if you think about it like
harvesting an animal is a very stressful
thing for an animal uhhuh like if you're
thinking about how a cow is harvested
yeah even if it has the
most um wonderful life you know it's
grass-fed it's out in a pasture it's not
inside like all of that might be great
and it is certainly better than the
alternative but the very end of its life
is still quite stressful this is a moral
thing or does this moral no I believe I
believe I believe it impacts the quality
of the meat right so think about the
cortisol levels that are surging through
that animal's body right at the time of
its death yeah but from an evolutionary
standpoint everything got eaten oh no no
I'm not that's not a moral question I'm
saying from a health perspective yeah
but I'm saying you're a lion the gazelle
you're chewing on is freaking the [__]
out as you eat it alive so there's no
way that can have some major no I think
it actually probably has an impact on
taste more than anything else um the
other thing is it's very hard I mean
this is more of an argument of why I
love Wild game is Wild game
eats the best plants the best feed right
so when you go to the grocery store and
you're buying you know a regular
grain-fed steak it's not eating what it
evolved to eat like it's you kind of
want things that are as close to eating
what they evolve to eat and you know for
for for deer that's like that's
basically grass right so um anyway these
things are processed in a way that
basically has nothing in them right so
you're just I'm just getting pure
protein yeah I don't want to derail this
but this is really interesting so you
snipe the deer at night using night
vision goggles so it basically dies in
its sleep it dies instantaneously yep
dies instantaneously
stressfree um and that is so interesting
how did you find out about these guys um
I met the founder of the company five
six years ago um and we just immediately
became friends I became completely
fascinated by the problem that they were
trying to solve which was how you know
the Hawaiian government is trying to
eradicate this species um because it is
destroying the island so this is a
species of deer that was brought to
Hawaii in the 1950s for hunting but it
had no Predator it was brought from
India where its only Predator was the
tiger you brought it to Hawaii it had no
predator and it has now run a mck so it
is kind of destroying three islands of
Hawaii are they finding a way to do this
sustainably now so that they can keep
having them the goal is by 2030 to have
it be sustainable right now they are
still not able to do it sustainably in
other words right now the deer are still
growing at a rate that is too
significant
Jesus uh head shots yes interesting wow
I don't know why I find that so
fascinating but that's very interesting
okay so back to protein intake right so
point is you could have a way protein
wake up I'm like oh Chomp Chomp into the
V not necessarily like I mean again it
depends on when you like to exercise for
example so so I should exercise fasted
is that the point of that um it depends
if I'm going to exercise first thing in
the morning I do it fasted if I'm going
to wait a couple of hours I'll have a
protein meal first but it doesn't matter
because I've always heard that you've
got so much glucose if you're eating and
now you're just going to get fat and
you're never going to lose it doesn't
matter no so so um I generally prefer to
exercise fasted but if the workout is
getting pushed till later a couple hours
later I'm going to have something before
not because I need to but because I want
to make sure I spread out those protein
servings enough W so at least two of my
protein servings aren't meals they're
like again the jerky is not a meal it's
a snack and then like a whey protein
shake again 40 50 grams of whey protein
in some you know cashew milk do would
you uh I'm willing to stomach the
venison snacks Andor chicken breast
Andor eggs eggs yep great cool love them
uh so if I'm willing to eat the amount
of protein that I need in eggs venison
whatever would I still do a protein
shake not necessarily no not at all and
do you because I have developed slowly
over time a deep aversion to anything
that's processed so I'm trying to get as
close to biting into the walking animal
as possible absolutely yeah that's great
okay so but you you're not stressed and
then you would have like kind of two
meals right so I'll probably also have
like my lunch would be a salad with
chicken breast or salmon and then my
dinner dinner is the easiest meal to hit
your protein Target right like that's
like falling off a log just because it's
typical to eat a steak chicken whatever
you're going to have talk to me red meat
white meat matter again I think it
matters less the color of the meat
matters much more the source of the meat
matters much more about how that anal
grain fed yeah and and how close can you
get it to an animal that's in its
natural state truthfully it's much
easier for me to get wild game that's
red meat like I much prefer elk and AIS
deer both Wild game that either I'm
killing or someone I know is killing and
it's the wild that's the important part
yeah it's an animal that's eating in the
environment it's it's an animal that's
not contained right and the contained is
problematic largely because of the diet
that we know they will need yep okay uh
how much meat how much of your protein
comes from meat by
percentage
um I don't know I'd have to figure it
out but clearly the majority H yeah
because the one thing I've always I also
like Greek yogurt by the way so that's
another thing that's a hard left so
Greek yogurt has a lot of protein it
does actually it's quite high protein
you eat it because of the taste
probiotics just another way to get
protein in to diversify a little bit
from boredom or diversity matters yeah
just some div no no just for me
diversity matters like I like to mix
things up and and it's just again it's
just a function of time like maybe I
don't have time to make an omelet right
now and I'm I got a quick call I got to
jump on so I can scarf down a bowl of
Greek yogurt with some nuts in
it this seems
impossible it seems too good no it
sounds amazing like I feel like the way
that I live right now would take a lot
more discipline than what you're
describing I'll be interested to see if
that's true in practice
um okay so let's fit eggs into the mix
here uh I'd love to get an idea knowing
that individual there's a lot of
individual variability here in fact we
should probably talk about saturated fat
at the individual level the one thing in
my diet I do not at all pay attention to
how much saturated fat I eat don't go
out of my way to consume it but I make
zero attempt to avoid it and because I
don't check my blood levels nearly
enough I am always a little hesitant to
push my exact diet onto people um do I
need to worry about saturated fat
potentially yeah um saturated fat can
increase your uh synthesis of
cholesterol it can also with enough of
it being consumed the liver
can sense the amount of saturated fat
and basically shut down the clearance of
cholesterol meaning the the the bringing
of cholesterol into the liver can I
quote Peter AA on cholesterol in the
book outlive if you haven't read it I
highly suggest it he said your total
cholesterol number is about as
meaningful to dying from heart disease
as your eye color that's right so you're
bringing up cholesterol so some
something matters something about
cholesterol matters but not the total
number right total cholesterol is again
not a particularly relevant number
apob which is the uh concent which is a
measurement a laboratory measurement
that is the
concentration of lipoproteins that carry
cholesterol into arteries that's what
you should care deeply about but when
someone says what's your total
cholesterol 200 milligrams per deciliter
who cares doesn't mean anything but
there is a type of cholesterol that is
carried in a certain well so cholesterol
for the most part that 200 m gr per
deciliter is your total cholesterol is
divided into three types of lipoproteins
a high each has a different carrier uh
no that 200 comes is the aggregation of
approximately three lipoproteins high
density lipoprotein low density
lipoprotein and very lowdensity
lipoprotein so if you look at your lab
you get you get a blood test done if
it's done correctly a lot of them are
not but if it's done correctly and they
do a direct measurement of LDL
cholesterol you will be able to add up
the vldl cholesterol the LDL cholesterol
the HDL cholesterol and the sum of those
three will equal the total cholesterol
so if the total cholesterol is 200 and
the HDL cholesterol is 70 and the vldl
cholesterol is 20 the LDL cholesterol
will be 110 yep and of those three
numbers um we would say the most
important Insight you could get would be
to take total cholesterol subtract HDL
cholesterol and that number is called
non-hdl cholesterol that number starts
to become a pretty good predictor of
risk so total cholesterol because those
are damaging in some way yeah that's now
telling you the total cholesterol
content of LDL and vldl and those are
the destructive
lipoproteins now an even better number
is not how much cholesterol is contained
in those two things but how many of
those two things do you have and that's
what's captured by
apob can you explain that more so each
of those
lipoproteins the vldl and the LDL have a
protein wrapped around them that protein
is called APO lipoprotein
b00 which is a very sexy name it's
abbreviated
apob so if you measure apob because LDL
and vldl have one and only one APO
lipoprotein b00 on them the APO number
is the concentration of those two
particles and the gradient of that the
more of those particles you have the
incre the greater the probability that
those particles are getting into your
artery walls got it so the the number of
those do matter and so if I just
subtract out my HDL subtract your HDL
from your total cholesterol you get the
cholesterol concentration of those two
particles but I'm but and that's
predictive of risk mhm but what's more
predictive of risk is the number of
those particles okay which how do
you I don't know if it's going to be
fruitful but there's something in that
math that I'm not following so if I got
back my cholesterol count and I look at
them I'd be able to tell of my 200 let's
say uh 110 are the two that are bad uh
but there's some total number it sounds
like you're a separate measurement you
don't you wouldn't impute it from the
those col you just have to go to apob
you have to get the apob measured that's
right yeah it's another Laboratory
measurement understood understood that
is unfortunately rarely done is it can
you just ask your doctor give me an apob
measurement absolutely okay it's a
relatively inexpensive test it's about
depending on the test it's somewhere
between and $20 do they not do it
because they disagree with you or they
just they don't they don't know what it
is troubling very okay uh so in fact we
should talk at least briefly about this
idea so in the book you talk about
medicine 3.0 versus Med medicine 2.0
medicine 2.0 is all about curing
medicine 3.0 is all about
prevention
um how do we would call medicine 2.0
more about treating than curing okay
fair it's largely not Curative right
very good distinction uh okay so if you
were going to give me the um the little
toolkit of medicine
3.0
uh what how would you begin to bundle
that like what are the the things that I
should be going towards well again to
your point so medicine 3.0 really says
we've reach the limits of what medicine
2.0 is good for medicine 2.0 is really
good at
curing uh acute problems so it's really
good at curing um infections traumas
acute issues it's really bad at treating
chronic problems MH cancer uh you know
recurrent heart disease
neurodegenerative disease type two
diabetes it's really bad at treating
those things and therefore all it really
does is prolong the period of time you
have those
things and I go through a lot of
explanation in the book as to why that
strategy is not the right strategy so
living longer is not ACC accomplished by
living longer with
disease living longer is accomplished by
living longer without disease once you
realize that you inevitably come to the
obvious conclusion that a new type of
medicine is needed which must be focused
on extending the period of time you do
not have disease and that word is
prevention which has been bastardized to
mean virtually nothing because everybody
talks about prevention but it has no
meaning right so true prevention has to
start very early early true prevention
needs a set of tools that medicine 2.0
doesn't participate in medicine 2.0
which is the medical system that every
one of us who's trained goes through is
largely A pharmacologic playbook if you
want to reach your full potential this
year you have got to focus on providing
yourself with the best possible building
blocks for your brain and body and that
is why I recommend butcher box you guys
know butcher box is a huge part of my
life because they go above and beyond to
Source only high quality and humanely
raised Meats and Seafood this includes
100% grass-fed beef free-range organic
chicken humanely raised pork and wild
caught Seafood all shipped for free and
delivered directly to your door this
year get exactly what you need to hit
your healthy eating goals butcher box is
offering our listeners their choice of
meat 2 lb of ground beef 3 lb of chicken
breast or 2 lb of salmon for fre free in
every order for a whole year plus get
$20 off your first order sign up today
for this incredible offer at
butcherbox.com
impact and use code impact to choose
your free offer and get $20 off now
you're going to get people who sit here
and say are all pharmacology is Bad
Medicine is bad no no no that's not true
at all pharmacology is wonderful
pharmacology has done amazing things in
medicine 2.0 and we would want to use
all of those far ologic tools as needed
in medicine 3.0 but it's literally you
know 1 of the equation where is
nutrition where is exercise where is
sleep where is emotional health those
things are also needed to delay the
onset of chronic disease and none of us
got trained in those tools so if if a
doctor is going to help their patient
with those other four tools they're
going to have to learn about it outside
of Medical Training that makes sense
uh okay so if we know what we're trying
to do is delay the onset of these
diseases you talk about that in the book
that basically the thing that
centenarians have in common is that they
probably were able to delay the arrival
of heart disease dementia uh because you
say this um cancer that these things are
building for oftentimes decades that you
can see heart disease in teenagers y uh
which is pretty crazy so these are
people that have probably delayed the
onset of the early symptoms of that for
decades more than the people that di say
70 or 80 exactly okay that makes sense
so now then I want to get to and we'll
stay on cholesterol here for a second so
uh you talk about in the book that
dietary cholesterol does not equal
cholesterol in your body so what does
what causes bad cholesterol being the
thing that I'm certainly more concerned
about so dietary cholesterol is very
difficult for our body to absorb it has
a bulky chemical side chain on it called
an Esther and the only way we could
absorb it is if we have an enzyme to cut
the Esther off called the deesterified
and bring it in we don't have much of
that enzyme so most of the cholesterol
you eat such as the cholesterol in you
know shellfish or eggs you poop out M
okay so we should just make sure
everybody understands that eating
cholesterol has almost zero bearing on
your cholesterol levels in your
blood that doesn't mean that your diet
has no bearing on the cholesterol in
your blood but your Gene
play a very significant role in the
levels of your blood lipids so we want
to always differentiate between
cholesterol and
lipoproteins cholesterol is the cargo
lipoproteins are the boat H
so um the term bad cholesterol doesn't
actually mean anything people say LDL is
the bad
cholesterol that's actually very
inaccurate right l LDL low density
lipoprotein is the boat that carries
cholesterol and LDL is bad but we should
really say LDL is the bad lipoprotein
the cholesterol in LDL is the same
cholesterol in HDL which people call
good cholesterol so you can see why it
doesn't make any sense now every cell in
your body makes cholesterol
so 95% of the cholesterol in your body
is cholesterol you
made the reason every cell in your body
makes cholesterol is because it is one
of the most important molecules in the
body if you couldn't make cholesterol
you would have died in
utero um and the reason for it is every
cell in your body is wrapped in a
membrane and that membrane is made of
cholesterol most of the um important
hormones in your body testosterone
estrogen progesterone cortisol are made
from cholesterol so this hormone is
absolutely this molecule is essential
for life
um but not every cell can make enough of
it so we have to be able to traffic it
between cells so we have to be able to
take it back to the liver the liver has
to be able to package it back out it has
to be able to move around the system so
if your body is like a big city the
Super Highway of that body is the blood
the circulatory system and the
circulatory system is made of water so
when you cut yourself you know you see
red stuff come out but don't let the
hemoglobin platelets and things confuse
you it's just water with a bunch of red
proteins in it um and fat doesn't mix
with water cholesterol is a fat it's a
lipid and it doesn't dissolve in water
so we can't just move cholesterol around
in the blood the way we move glucose or
the way that we move sodium or potassium
those things are dissolving in water
they're called hydrophilic and they move
around freely cholesterol is not it's
hydrophobic it repels water so that's
why we have lipoproteins we have have to
have these lipoproteins to move the
cholesterol in and out of the
body and that gets to the point of there
are basically these different types of
lipoproteins some of them are very high
density they have lots of protein and a
little bit of fat in them some of them
are low
density lots of fat less protein and
some are very low density virtually no
protein and lots of fat or
cholesterol and they have different
properties and it turns out that the low
density and the very low density ones
are the ones that are arthrogenic
meaning they're the ones that promote
the destruction of your
arteries okay so something is starting
to slowly come into Focus for me so fat
in the blood is bad cholesterol or fat
which one do you mean I mean fat so when
we talk about if if I'm understanding
what you're saying correctly there are
two times now that fat getting loose has
sounded like a problem uh well let's not
so so fat is rarely FL floating around
the bloodstream for the same reason but
if A lipoprotein if the very low density
is indicated because it has very little
protein and a lot of fat well just when
I use fat there what I'm really
referring to is triglyceride and
cholesterol but they're inside the
lipoprotein why ises it matter that the
ratio of protein to Fat starts getting
low it only matters in that that's how
I'm describing why they difference in
density got it so it isn't that it is
fat that makes them problematic so what
do they do what's problematic is that
the lowdensity lipoprotein and the very
low density lipoprotein
are the only ones that seem to make
their way into coronary artery walls or
artery walls in general and they have
the potential to get stuck in there so
the high density Lio shap thing no we
don't really have a great sense of it
it's something about apob so HDL high
density lipoprotein doesn't have APO on
its surface it has something called apoa
on its surface and when a high density
lipoprotein goes into the artery wall it
comes back out when AN apob particle
goes into the artery wall sometimes it
comes out but sometimes it stays in
there and when it stays in there or gets
retained bad things begin to happen the
first of those things is it undergos a
chemical reaction called
oxidation that chemical reaction called
oxidation creates an inflammatory signal
and that tells inflammatory cells called
macrophases or monocytes to come they
become macrophases and they eat that
oxidized LDL
molecule that's what kicks off a
devastating Cascade in which the body
ironically and paradoxically in trying
to fix the problem creates a
catastrophic problem that ultimately
leads to the creation of a plaque that
if it ruptures will block the blood
supply of the artery and cause a heart
attack you've got the two types that end
up basically they have the apob on them
apob can get stuck in my arteries once
it's stuck on my arteries my body sends
a immune response effectively that then
ends up creating a problem uh is that
calcification calcification is the final
stage of the body trying to repair the
problem okay so think of it as the
concrete that gets poured on a melting
down nuclear reactor so when you get a
CT scan that's like what's called a
coronary CT scan to look for
calcification the presence of that
calcification while by itself not
problematic is predictive of something
bad that's happened I describe I think
in the book calcification is like going
through a neighborhood and seeing bars
on the windows the bars on the windows
are actually a good thing they're going
to prevent somebody from breaking in but
it tells you what kind of neighborhood
you're in yeah okay now that makes a lot
of sense going on with my diet one thing
that I'm very curious about and there's
a raging debate online a cal is just a
calorie
um where where do you come down on that
in terms of the quality of the calorie
does it matter um if I'm eating ter like
if you agree that the quality of the
calorie matters but I'm still undere
eating do I have a
problem so the the the calorie is a
calorie discussion always needs some
clarification are we talking about with
respect to energy balance are we talking
about with respect to nutrition and
health are we talking about with respect
to
satiety and and so we have to clarify
which of those we're talking about all
I'm talking about ever is longevity so
so then a calorie is not a calorie for
sure right so in other words if you took
a bunch of people and put you know one
group of them on 2 200 calories a day of
Twix bars and another group on 2500
calories of you
know one food only lettuce you know or
whatever it wouldn't be 2500 calories
lettuce but you know 2500 calories of
venison sticks venison sticks and
another group on 2 200 calories of some
well-rounded diet that's you know you
blah blah they might all end up with the
same weight they might have a different
Health Quality and they I would expect
it I clearly don't expect the guy on
2500 calories of Twix bars to live as
long as the person on 2500 calories of
good food nor do I expect them to feel
the same so if you're totally and by the
way they might end up at slightly
different weights because of how they
feel and while you may in this
experiment control only their intake you
might not be able to control their
energy expenditure so they might
actually expend different amounts of
energy because of how they feel
so um the the calorie as a calorie
debate I think is kind of a silly one
because a lot of times people are
talking past each other when they're
yelling at each other and they don't
understand what they're talking about
and so you you know we just have to
understand are we talking about pure
controlled you know calorimetry or are
we talking about in your case what
you're asking about which is I think
more important which is
Health we are um innately really really
bad at estimating risk and oddly enough
makes me wonder about you and race cars
so what is it that draws you to race
cars do you think you're accurately
assessing the risk on that I I I will
say you know that's not an unusual
question I get asked a lot I I think
that uh I feel safer in a race car than
I do in my street car really absolutely
I feel far far more frightened in the
drive I have to take tonight from here
to San Diego because I'm going to be on
the 405 and the five and I know that 80%
of people at some point on that drive
are going to be checking their phone or
losing focus or not paying attention I
don't know what percentage of them maybe
10% of them are also going to be under
the influence of alcohol and uh they
pose a infinitely greater threat to me
me than I I feel like I could ever face
in a race car so other than driving what
are some just grotesque misjudgments of
the risk in terms of behaviors that
people do just on a daily
basis um I think I think Automotive is
is a very big one so yeah good that we
got that one first I think another one
that people sort of
misunderstand
is
alcohol you know I mean I I enjoy
alcohol as much as anybody but I don't
think people understand how once you get
Beyond one to two drinks like how
harmful it is on your liver
and it's sort of like Tylenol right like
at any dose Tylenol is really hard on
your liver but for most of us because
Tylenol has no good feeling associated
with it we don't really tend to use it
more than we should we you know if we
have a headache we take it and it makes
the headache go away and but but we
don't find ourselves like taking four
Tylenol every day just because of
whatever reason and yet I'm I'm
constantly amazed at how much people
drink even when there's no apparent
reason for it right so so there's always
a reason to have a drink right there's
there you can always come up with a
great reason to have a drink but there's
too many sort of blah reasons that
people are drinking so I think that um
that that to me is an asymmetric and
unnecessary risk meaning the pleasure
that they're getting from that you know
those four shitty Budweisers that they
have is n anything worth the potential
downside it's causing in the long run
which says nothing by the way of how
often I think people do get behind the
wheel of their car when they've had a
drink in them and if there's one thing
I've learned in the simulator it's how
even one drink compromises your ability
when it matters so I remember simulator
a driving simulator yeah so I have a
driving simulator at home which is where
I do much of my learning um but I
remember one day I was like yeah I was
going to go drive the Sim after dinner
and I had a glass of wine with dinner I
remember getting in the simulator and I
was like
what in the hell is wrong with me here
like I am missing every Apex my I'm just
a little bit off I'm a little bit off
and I realized oh I had a glass of wine
even one glass of wine is compromising
me um so how many times have I gotten a
car having two glasses of wine at a
restaurant the answer is tons was I
legally drunk no I was well below
008 but if even if I'm 006 I'm legally
fine is that still a reasonable strategy
right and and I think the answer is
probably not you think there are dietary
things that people are doing that have
just an asymmetric risk reward yeah you
know I'm probably kind of a a huge
advocate for caloric restriction
um at least intermittent bouts of
caloric restriction so I believe that
the short-term discomfort of not eating
for 5
days once twice four five times a year
going through a cycle like that I think
that the
shortterm inconvenience of that
is Trivial compared to the potential
benefit of of a true fast you know water
only fast for some period of time and I
still don't know what that minimum is I
think it's probably a minimum of three
days are necessary to start to get some
of the real benefits of autophagy
mitophagy and things like that but
what's the difference between autophagy
and mitophagy um autophagy is the cell
eating itself and mitophagy specifically
is the recycling of the mitochondria
okay
um so I think when someone says and I
have many patients or friends or family
members who have said like yeah that's
just there's no way I'm ever going to I
could never give up food even
transiently I
think that's that's comes from like not
not even being willing to give it a
shot like what's the
emotional hangup cuz you were you used
to be literally the epitome of the
robotic eater just insanely strict and
you said about 3 years ago you were like
nope not doing that anymore and I think
to quote you exactly I no longer have
the intestinal fortitude to eat like a
robot so there was something in you that
it no longer was worth it yeah that
became much harder than what I do today
which is so so back then I wasn't doing
any time-restricted feeding I wasn't
doing any fasting it was a pure form of
dietary restriction so my my sort of
mental model for nutrition is everybody
is starting out on one side eating the
standard American
diet abbreviated as sad which is an
appropriate
abbreviation and the thing I always tell
patients on day one is like look the
good news is you can't get any worse
than this the only thing if you're
starting at the sad the only thing you
can do to make it worse is eat more of
the sad right but it's like the standard
American diet and I don't believe this
was deliberate right I don't think
there's a conspiracy theory here but
just through a lot of bad
luck uh has arrived at the absolute
worst combination of macronutrients you
could possibly imagine like you couldn't
come up with a way to confuse someone's
metabolism than to combine fats and
carbohydrates in the ratios that they
are combined in most of the foods that
we would eat by default if we were left
to our
brothers so from there I say look
there's kind of two introductory moves
which are not mutually exclusive but you
can pick one or the other the first is
time restricted feeding where now you
don't limit what you eat you just limit
when you eat it and then the second is
dietary restriction you don't restrict
when you eat you don't restrict how much
you eat which you also don't restrict en
time feeding but you restrict certain
elements of what you eat so for those
three years that I was on a ketogenic
diet which is I mean probably one of the
most demanding subsets of dietary
restriction um you know I'd pull that
lever as hard as it could be pulled then
you move into diets that sort of mimic
fasting um which is basically just
another way of saying hypocaloric diets
for transient uh periods of time and
then ultimately even beyond that is
fasting just you know water only also
for limited periods of time nowhere in
there do I
include constant caloric restriction so
you know reducing by 20 30% your energy
intake indefinitely I I think the data
are pretty clear that that is not a
winning strategy there's something about
the cycling into and out of C catabolic
versus anabolic State you're basically
Clearing House right you're sort of
getting the cells that are themselves
defective and hopefully the ones with
the most effective mitochondria we'd
love to Target those the most for other
reasons um what you want to see is the
regrowth you want to when you refeed you
want to see The Selective repopulation
of the better cells the most robust
experiments done on this in primates did
not really suggest that as the diet got
better the benefits of caloric
restriction got better in other words
the worse the diet the better the
benefit of caloric restriction which
points us to this idea the dietary
restriction should still always be some
component of a healthy nutrition
strategy meaning like if you're eating
like [__] stop eating like sh stop
eating you really really if you're if
you're committed to never eating
anywhere but McDonald's caloric
restriction will have a much bigger
effect on you positively than you know
if your Baseline intake is you know the
way you would eat for example that kind
of stuff at like the Deep cellular level
about where we're going and what this is
going to look like is is really
fascinating to me definitely not
something that I have the kind of grip
on even remotely close to what you do
but nonetheless seems like if you're um
really going to get to 100 at a high
level it seems like you're going to have
to take that pretty seriously now you've
talked a lot about one of the tests that
you want to make real is the ability to
check for autophagy and to see in the
blood um you've thrown out a couple
times that this is like a you probably
know the people that would be creating
this test um and B that it wouldn't be
you know it's not measured in the
billions so what what would that really
take um is it something that could be
commercialized and would give people the
impetus to put the capital up for it or
what does that future look like from a
funding perspective again this is not
like the world's hardest problem to
crack um but I I if I'm going to be
completely truthful I don't know how
commercially interesting it is as a
general rule diagnostic tests are not
very commercially interesting um my
interests are not remotely commercial my
interest is in just knowing what to do
it's like I want this test to tell me
exactly what the right fasting protocol
needs to be should I be fasting 3 days a
month 7 Days Every 3 month months 14
days once a year like I want to know
that and there's no amount of money that
would make it worth you know not knowing
the answer to that question um wow
that's a bold statement well think about
it I'm not to suggest that like money
doesn't matter and money you can't do
great things with money like I want
money just as much as the next person
but never at the expense like I don't
want anything to get in the way of the
knowledge that can drive living longer
that to me is such a priority that I
would rather be poor but know how to you
know live longer than have all the money
in the world and lose my health I
totally get that but I will say one
thing I want to talk about is you said
that um one you've said that you think
that you eat disfunction even if you
don't have an eating disorder which I
actually thought was really interesting
and then you said that part of why you
gave up the robotic eating was you were
worried about how was affecting your
daughter's view of food talk about that
CU I think certainly in this the the
movement that we're all going through
right now there's a real risk of that
that if I had had kids 5 years ago when
I was like ter I was shredded I was so
myopically focused on everything that
went in my mouth and I loved it about
myself and I would Rave about how much
discipline I had so for sure if I had
kids they would have been wildly
influenced by how much pride I took in
not eating and so yeah do worry what
that would have done and I thought it
was super sensitive of you to to
recognize that and change yeah I mean my
brother um actually was the he he
brought this point to my attention first
but he said you know be thoughtful about
how you describe your own interactions
with food and when you're giving you
know your kids input on what to eat or
what not to eat try to tether it less to
you know body dysmorphic ideas and
Trigger it you know Peg it more to
Performance issues for example right
because those things are still true
right if you if you eat well or eat
poorly it affects your performance it
affects your cognition it affects a lot
of things um and if the focus is more on
those things than on you know sort of
daddy why aren't you eating this because
I don't want to be fat well you know
that's and and look there's a truth to
it like I I mean I'm a vain person I I
I'm not you know I've come to a place
where I've accepted the fact that I can
I won't look like I used to look like
cuz I'm not willing to put in that
amount of sacrifice ever again you and I
have the luxury of being old enough to
be able to think through that in a
slightly uh less emotional way and at
least make that make that choice when I
think people who are
younger um I don't know I just don't
know if they're equipped fully with the
tools to make all of those decisions I
want to ask you about change you have
changed a lot in your life like multiple
times from starting out and getting your
degree in um engineering and Mathematics
and then ultimately pulling the the
first Switcheroo over into medicine then
leaving medicine and becoming a
consultant then going into hardcore
research and um doing uh nonprofit work
and then now back to Medicine what what
has allowed you to constantly make those
jumps or what propels you to make those
jumps I have been able to internalize
something that I think is not innate to
most people which is the fallacy of a
sunk
cost so uh the sunk cost fallacy is
something that gets talked about in you
know any Econ 101 class right so you've
uh you know you're you're building a
bridge and the you know the cost of the
bridge is $10 million and you're $9
million into it and the contractor says
Ah it's going to be another 11
million um for many people they are
evaluating that based on how much money
they have already put into the project
and that becomes a very dangerous game
because is you can't get those dollars
back so instead you have to evaluate it
from the standpoint of exactly where
you're standing at that moment in
time and for whatever
reason
I've I've been able to stand at any
point in my life and sort of say I want
to do X I'm going to evaluate that only
through the lens of how many years do I
have left on Earth and not at all
through the lens of what have I already
put into this
um and I think that's just made it
easier to do things that on the outside
look odd look orthogonal and then to
leave medicine um whatever it was 12
years
ago that was something that a lot of
people came to me and said you got to
reconsider this like you've put far too
much into this and I just said like look
I'm going to do something for the next
40 years I want it to be exactly what I
want to do and that's way better to me
than saying well I'm going to do
something that I don't really really
want to do because I've spent the last
10 years doing it which is where I was
i' put 10 years into medical school and
training um postgraduate training and it
was like look that's that's 10 years I
can't get back um and it's that's a
fraction of the time that's still in
front of me so just it just seemed very
logical to me to always pursue my
Bliss
um and also I mean going back to
something you said I think we're in a
different world now I mean I think the
days are long gone of you do one thing
for your whole life I mean I
think for some people that will be the
way to do it and that's that's great but
it's no longer so ridiculous to have a
career change every five years I
don't I don't know what I'll be doing in
10 years but I'd be shocked if it looked
exactly like what it looks like today
like I think you know if you're not
growing if you're not constantly being
reminded of how much more how much
higher you have to climb um I suspect
it's I suspect life becomes a lot less
fun what drives
you I mean truthfully I wish I could
come up with a whole bunch of pleasant
you
know sort of nice things to say I think
in reality unfortunately a lot of my
drive is
insecurity um that is is
shocking and I've heard you say that
before um and the first time I heard you
say it I thought that's really
fascinating because you're somebody who
gives me insecurity so the fact that you
feel insecurity is pretty fascinating
and so as a driver in what way does that
drive you David Foster Wallace said in
in what what is unquestionably my
absolute favorite 22 minutes that one
could ever listen to which is his
commencement speech from 2005 called
This is water so and and the first time
I ever heard this it didn't resonate
with me I needed to hear it a few times
before it really resonated where he
said if I if if you if you worship power
you will forever feel
powerless right and and that doesn't
really resonate with me because I'm not
a power Seeker but I absolutely worship
intellect and and when he with the next
words out of his mouth are you will
forever feel like a fraud I'm like that
is so true I find myself at least on a
daily basis
thinking dude I hope people don't find
out how much I don't know wow and and I
wish I wasn't saying that I mean I wish
I could I really wish I wish I could say
all of my motivations are pure it's all
I'm you know I'm Mother Teresa I just
want to fix every problem and make the
world a better place but the reality of
it is like I think a significant amount
of my motivation is just this complete
desire to not be found out as a fraud
who doesn't know stuff I love that for
two reasons one I think that and I'll
speak very much for myself from the
moment I met you I was like this guy
[__] with my head like there's just
certain people where I'm like I it's
hard to feel smart around you so the the
fascinating thing is you know to hear
that uh that there's some of that
driving you um and then two hopefully
people listening to this that that um
aren't comparing themselves to you but
yet are looking at you going this guy is
[__] fascinating I'm really
interested and they have like a warm
feeling for you uh that's probably equal
parts like oh he's compassionate towards
humanity and that's rad and then equal
parts like wow he's [__] smart that's
you know he's got cool [__] to say and
so for them to hear that you can be so
um open and honest about oh yeah I have
insecurity and um it's low self-esteem
that's pushing me forward because they
they will look at you and think it
possible that you could possibly have
low self-esteem um which I think is
really really good for people to see
that that never goes away and one of the
things that I've always thought was I'm
not going to call it a superpower but
something that I've been glad that I
have for myself is my motives are always
apparent to me even when they're ugly
and Petty and yeah I mean there are
times where like what's driving me for
whatever reason is ugly it's Petty it's
um makes me feel worse about myself
whatever but at least I have Clarity on
what it is yeah I wish I could say I
always could see it I don't think I can
I think it requires a lot
of I I don't think two years ago I could
have
acknowledged um what I can be much more
brutally honest with myself about today
what happened that made that I mean you
know I've always seen therapists my you
know there's been very rare has there
been a season in my life where I wasn't
sort of searching for some sense of of
you know why do I feel so tormented
and you know one of them said the most
insightful thing to me I've ever heard
you know your entire life your entire
life has been basically driven by um
three skills three things that you do um
that you're really good at and they're
not good things by the way right
emotional
detachment rage and Obsession W you
those are like the only three tool you
are a guy that has a toolbox that has
three tools and those are the three
tools and she said look you've got a lot
of good stuff out of those tools there
are a lot of people who get those three
tools and they just end up in jail so
you've managed to through a lot of luck
um you know wind up not in jail wind up
as a quasi successful human being a
contributor to society a father like
you've done some good stuff but she also
said you're sort of of at the end of
your rope with those three tools like
you can't get any more juice out of
squeezing those things there is no
combination of emotional Detachment
Obsession and rage that is going to
produce anything of value and you're
actually now at the diminishing part of
the curve so now you're actually you're
regressing so you're going to need new
tools and you know so in many ways I
think that's what has allowed me to go
back and say okay well what what is the
impetus of that why is the why are these
things happening what you know who do I
want to be in 5 years right CU I can't
fathom what I like I can't fathom being
any different in 5 days so I have to
think bigger I have to think of like
okay in five years you want to be it's
sort like what we talked about at the
outside if if when you're a 100 you want
to be able to do these things you can
back out of that and say this is what
you have to be able to do when you're
you know 70 or 60 and similarly if in
five years when my kids are aged this
this and this I want to be this kind of
a
person and right now I'm not on a path
to be anywhere near that in fact I'm on
a path to be completely different you in
a completely different place okay so
start backing out what the person who
can do those things in 5 years has to be
able to do what in a month how would
they react in this situation versus how
do you always react in a situation
people like me who are very good at
doing things where harder work produces
better results like when that's your
playbook and you are now confronted with
trying to do something where that
Playbook doesn't work it is ego demor
iing right like if the answer is just
swim further like all you have to do is
just keep swimming don't stop swimming I
got it like I that is my book man but if
the answer is no you now have to be able
to control your emotions in a certain
way you now have to be able to as you
said recognize in a
moment when you have an emotional
reaction why it's what it's really about
cuz it's never about what you think it's
about it's about something else can you
stop your yourself in the moment and
recognize that that is a new skill and
I'm a baby trying to learn that skill
and my old trick of just work harder
just work harder it fails so in many
senses it's like the most intimidating
thing I've ever tried to do right what's
your process and all this like how are
you actively getting better one is just
showing up every day right so
it's like you know the last time I or
last week when I was the last time I
spoke with one of these therapists I
just had a really miserable day I mean I
just didn't want to talk to him at all
you know I was in a really really bad
mood and so part of it I guess is you
set yourself up around people who are
never going to take your [__] right so
you have therapists for me having these
these collection of people around me
it's like they absolutely positively
don't let me get away with anything you
know I guess part of it too is just
having really patient people around you
because you're going to make a lot of
mistakes in this process right so you
have to you know in my case I feel very
fortunate I have a spouse who is uh you
know I I would say more forgiving than
probably she should be she believes in
the in the sort of like this is what you
could be in five years this is this is
the guy you can be so when someone
believes in that they're much more
willing to help you when you fall
they'll pick you up as opposed to point
out that you fell and do you have like a
specific vision of yourself that you're
building towards or
chasing I mean I do
um and it's not it's not a professional
version of me it's a personal version of
me if I get wave a magic wand what kind
of a husband what kind of a father am I
and the reason I use those two as an
example is it's unfortunately the people
who are closest to me who always see the
worst of me and so most of what I think
about is how do you uh how do you show
up for those people cuz if you you can
show up as the best version of you for
those people the trickle effect is
everyone's going to be fine like you
will be a great version of you with
everybody so it's it's less
about how do you show up at the TSA
check gate when the person's obnoxious
I'm not I don't worry about that that
much that that's a relatively easy thing
to control but when you're taking out
your problems on your kids or on your
spouse you know to me that's that's the
stuff that's just got to stop and um and
if you can get to that to me that's like
the that's the hill of the mountain
that's like like that's the hill when
you climb that well at that point you're
going to be treating everybody the way
that they deserve to be treated
including yourself by the way I mean as
you probably know um those of us who are
the biggest you
know sort of jerks to others are usually
jerks to
ourselves you're quite aware of how hard
you are on other people when they make
mistakes do you realize how hard you are
on yourself look do you know what
yourself talk is when you're making
errors and and I started paying
attention to it and I was like wow
that's really that's harsh that's very
harsh that you would that you that you
think these things of yourself which
again it all kind CES back to this
insecurity and at the outset I I I said
um you know whatever five years ago or
four years ago 90% of my bandwidth was
on like how to not die and today that's
only 50% of my bandwidth the other 50%
is the whole physical stuff we talked
about and then it's this right it's this
um what does an examined life mean and
is it a life worth living um
because you
know I I do think we suffer so much in
our own heads uh more than we suffer any
any other way
[Music]
um and I don't know the answer to that I
here's what I know I know that that's
way harder than reducing the risk of
heart disease um I know that's way
harder than you know addressing that is
way harder than fasting or doing all of
these other things that are even
non-pharmacologic interventions that I
think can fix all those other things and
certainly for someone like me it's
harder than you know exercising or being
disciplined about all these other things
um and I suspect in part because it's
less amenable to doing right right the
things that we do um tend to be a little
bit easier but this is this is tough
stuff so I don't know maybe part of the
reason to want to live longer is to just
give more Runway to figure this out
effectively why would you want to live
longer if you're
unhappy and that's such a obvious
question and yet I am
amazed absolutely amazed at how much I
interact with people because remember
all I do is interact with people who
want to live longer that's my job
everybody I'm talking to everybody who
wants to talk to me always wants to talk
about how to live longer how to live
better in some way and yet very rarely
are they paying attention to this aspect
of their life what is their relationship
like with themselves how well as you put
it do they understand themselves what
are their relationships with other
people how well are they able to
regulate their emotions how present are
they what is their sense of purpose what
is driving them all these things and if
that house is in
disarray I would make the argument that
living longer is a curse not a
blessing it's a bold
statement but push back on it I mean
what's what's the definition of torture
right let's let's play a thought
experiment if I said to you
Tom I'm going to Grant you
immortality in perfect health so it's
not going to be like tonius where I let
you live forever but you age forever
that would be hell no no I'm going to
allow you to stay right like you are now
you're not going to get one more wrinkle
on your face you're never going to get a
disease would you take it yes I'm not
going to give it to anybody else in your
life oh yeah I would take that I'm
always shocked that other people my wife
included wouldn't but I would all right
so so let's go one step further I'm
going to give it no I wouldn't that's so
interesting do you know how many people
you're going to watch die wait I'm
making the Assumption that's what
bothers you why wouldn't you take that
um well let's come back to me I want to
keep going with you for a minute okay so
now I'm going to make the I'm going to
give you a different experiment we're
going to do same thing mhm but I'm going
to put you on a desert island now yep
and I'm going to provide everything for
you MH so you're not going to have to
worry about finding food um in fact
forget the desert island I'm going to PE
keep you in this beautiful house yep and
I'm going to somehow keep the lights on
and I'm going to somehow keep the food
coming in but there will be no other
human on this planet for you to ever
interact with including your wife would
you take that can I kill myself no so I
have to live forever like that yes
that's the first one where just what I
know about the human psyche breaking in
isolation I I it would be ill advised
though God I would want to if you'd let
me kill myself at any point I would take
it but if I can't it's too dangerous no
of course you wouldn't take it right I
mean you how it's not in a course for me
that is not self-evident and if I didn't
understand what happens to the human
psyche when it's isolated in in my life
where I have been isolated for extended
periods of time I have experienced no
suffering
whatsoever I don't disagree with that
but I think question is yeah what's the
longest period of time you've been
isolated yeah exactly and what is
isolated truly mean yeah yeah yeah and
if I have input like if you let me keep
the lights on and I could have
entertainment I've thought a lot about
this like uh how much would that help
but like let's you saw the movie cast
away yeah okay so if I had any glimmer
of hope that I could get off that Island
I would want to be alive I would want to
try and try that's a totally different
story right so this is what I'm saying
is even the hope that I could one day
Rec I'm telling you there's no hope I'm
telling you that I'm going to let you
live indefinitely in this house all by
yourself okay so that's just an extreme
example of one dimension of emotional
health which is connection to others and
I'm I'm telling you that given
everything to excess oh and by the way
I'll even I'll even sweeten the deal Tom
I'll give you all the money in the world
and you can buy whatever you want wow
right now buy what oh you could buy
Yachts art whatever you want we've we're
going to have robots that do everything
for you that that everything and you
can't interact with these robots I was
going to say you you complicated the
robots are not they're not going to supp
so there's there's everything I could
ever want except for you can have all
the cars all the Yachts all the whatever
you're not going to do it if you really
stop to think about it you're not going
to do it because with no connection to
another person it's a meaningless life
yep so we could do the same sort of
exercise going through all of these
different elements of emotional health
and I think if people are really being
brutally honest with themselves they'll
realize that if you you know if your
wife hates you if your kids hate you if
your you know you're if people around
you don't feel good about you and you
don't feel good about yourself and
you're not you know you don't have a
sense of why you're doing what you're
doing I think I think it's I think it's
a tough I think it's a tough way to live
so it do you think that people asking
that question of how to live longer is
in some ways not the wrong question but
it's just so incomplete that you need to
address the emotional
side I think it's a very understandable
question um I can't speak to others but
I certainly through my own experience
can understand why one would ask that
question and why it's something you
would want to grasp on to I mean I think
that for most of us the thought of not
existing is a
little um if not frightening certainly
very UNC comfortable H non-existence is
very
difficult only on the back side so we
all know what non-existence is like try
to imagine what you were like before you
were born so I don't I it's possible I'm
duding myself it's also possible that I
really just see this slightly
differently so I have absolutely no fear
of not
existing
if yeah the thought of just not waking
up tomorrow only gives me anxiety around
ooh did I make sure that I sorted things
out for my wife like is she going to be
okay like the thought of something bad
happening to her I don't like that
um knowing that I'm about to die would
change my frame of reference so
radically that it would make me
immediately behave differently so
definitely a huge part of the way that I
behave is predicated on that I have more
time I try to operate knowing that it's
certainly not guaranteed I could have an
aneurysm and Keel over and die before
the end of this podcast uh I'm very
aware of that um the reason that this
feels so important to me and the reason
that I was so glad you included it in
the book is that I think the only thing
ultimately that matters is how you feel
about yourself when you're by yourself
and if you have earned your own respect
I think that's hugely important I just
found it very intriguing that not a lot
of people are going to cover that topic
in your book and I was wondering if
there is if it's just that like hey make
sure that that it's worth fighting this
hard to stay alive and make sure that
you're not just driven by the animal
instinct to fight or flight and
basically you have a vision of your
mortality that you're running away from
but you're never like figuring out why
you live or is there also a sense
of if you're in that state where you're
very stressed out you're prone to anger
whatever the case may be you're also
shortening your life yeah I think it's
both Tom and I think that a lot of
people are self-sabotaging without
understanding why
so we have a lot of agency over living
longer I mean if there's one thing I
hope someone takes away from this book
it's how malleable their lifespan is and
how malleable their health span is but
you have to do things to get that as you
pointed out at the beginning of the
discussion there is no easy way to to do
this um there's not a pill or a specific
workout or a superfood or a supplement
or whatever that's going to make all of
this easy it's a lot of stuff that has
to be done over a relatively long period
of time and your ability to do that is
highly predicated on your relationship
with yourself and so you know having
sort of poor sleep habits poor nutrition
habits poor exercise exercise habits on
some level has a component or a root in
your emotional
health and that's not true for everybody
but it is true for a lot of people uh I
and I see this constantly in my patients
right I see patients whose Own Story
whose own narrative is partly an
impediment to their actions and so
they're suffering twice they're
suffering in that they're
failure to take actions or their actions
that they're taking for example drinking
too much are going to actually shorten
their life but they're also going to um
decrease the joy of their life and the
harmony of their life for whatever
period they
have so let's say that we do everything
right let's say we've got meaning and
purpose We have dealt with our emotional
difficulties we have identified and this
is actually something that's really
important that I took away from the book
you really really have to figure out
what of the horsemen is coming for you
what agent of death from uh family
history genetic makeup lifestyle all of
that which one is most likely to come
and get you I think that's very
important it might be worth actually
recapping who the horsemen are we've
touched on them I think all of them but
we didn't name them as like these are
the horsemen might be worth doing that
um but so you've you're doing all this
how long can we live like is it really
like we're already there it's like 122
and and I hope you get there my friend
and follow the book and you'll get to
122 or can we actually push this farther
based on what we have today I don't see
us exceeding the human record for
longevity I think to go beyond that
would require a technological
breakthrough so I would never represent
that you know doing everything to the
max with respect to perfect nutrition
perfect exercise perfect management of
the horsemen through all means necessary
that that's going to get someone to
exceed that level um you know
my thinking of this is that you know we
might have 10 years of stretch um which
is a huge amount if you really stop to
think about it right if your you know
life expectancy is 82 and you make it to
92 instead in their quality exactly and
that's the point right where I'm really
confident we have the capacity to change
it is on quality M and you know I said
to you everybody comes to me on some
level and they want to talk about
longevity but when I really probe them
what they really mean is Health span
they don't care as much about how long
they live they really care about the
quality at the end of their
life I care about both be really honest
as do I Health span would be if I don't
have that it's all meaningless I totally
agree with you um I
would pay almost any
price to live longer and so the for
instance um the question that that uh
you asked like I would even if there was
an apocalypse as long as there were some
other people even if it killed everyone
I knew and loved which would be brutal
man like I am I am into my wife in a way
most people just are not into their
significant others I can tell by talking
to them and even that I would if a
meteorite hit and it was like your your
wife is going to die but you can live
I'd be like yeah I want to live so my
wife wouldn't though she's like if you
die I'm going that's so interest I can't
rep my head I mean it depends on my kids
but but yes if my wife and kids were not
on this Earth I wouldn't want to be on
this what would happen if God forbid
Peter God forbid I don't have kids
because partly because I am so afraid of
how devastating it would be if they died
but if they
died would you want to
die um I mean again I I hope I never
have to contemplate that but if I lost
all of my kids yeah I i' I'd have a hard
time probably wanting to go on Wow Wow I
get it man look it's it is I I have seen
people go through it it is an unbearable
thing that I can't believe life asks of
anybody but despite knowing how bad that
hurts and I would not want to go through
it I don't know man and and look of
course I might get so rocked I'm just
saying here from an emotional sub iety
standpoint where it is just a thought
exercise um I don't understand people's
response to be like yeah just take me
out but let's go back to I think what's
the more germine point which is um you
want quality of life and length of life
I hope what comes across really clearly
in the book is those are not mutually
exclusive and what I really would like
people to understand is if you pursue
them both you get them both in fact if
you just focus on health span if you
just just focus on preserving cognition
having the most physically robust body
possible as you age and pursuing
emotional health you are guaranteed to
get lifespan benefits as
well okay so talk to me about the
horsemen let's name them so there's four
three of them basically account for the
majority
of death in the uh first world one of
them directly doesn't account for that
much of the death but indirectly
probably accounts for the most of it in
other words it's the amplifier of the
other three so the big three are the
diseases of atherosclerosis so heart
disease and stroke second one is cancer
third one is neurodegenerative diseases
inclusive of all dementias so that
includes Alzheimer's disease uh
Parkinson's disease Louis body dementia
vascular dementia Etc so those those
three really they they show up a lot on
death certificates they kill a lot of
people the fourth one is more of a
spectrum it's not a single disease but
it's the spectrum that goes from
hyperinsulinemia to insulin resistance
fatty liver disease all that metabolic
stuff we talked about all the way out to
type 2 diabetes and again not a huge
number of people's death certificate as
Naf D type 2 diabetes a little bit but
not not staggering but when you're on
that Spectrum the further you get
towards the type two I abetes side of
that Spectrum you're just doubling your
risk essentially of all the other three
Horsemen do you think that metabolic
disease is causitive like is basically
every
non um traumatic death is it Downstream
no it's it's it's uh it's neither
necessary nor sufficient but it is
causitive so so you can have causality
without necessity and sufficiency so
let's take an obvious example smoking is
smoking positively related to lung
cancer 100% like meaning there is a
causal relationship between smoking and
lung cancer but 15% of people who get
lung cancer never smoked I don't know
the number but many people who smoke
don't get lung cancer so similarly
metabolic disease is 100% causally
related to the other diseases but not
everybody who gets met not everybody
who's metabolically ill is going to
necessarily succumb to those diseases
you could die of something else um and
not everybody who succumbs to those
diseases had metabolic disease okay
that's really interesting there's at
least one example you give in the book
I'm not sure where you put your own
story but you scored a six on the
calcification uh scale very young 30
something and then anahad Connor who we
bizarrely both know you know him way way
way way way better than I do but I had
the Good Fortune of meeting him um he
scored like 126 or some ridiculous thing
so is that the kind of example where you
guys were both relatively healthy but
have this what genetic predisposition
well totally different issues I mean
anahad as I write about in the book had
unbeknownst to him a very elevated LP
little a um which is genetic and he was
otherwise exceptionally healthy um and
is to this day exceptionally healthy but
had this genetic issue that was
driving you know rapidly advancing heart
disease and luckily um you know was
caught really ear I mean 125 or whatever
his calcium score was pretty darn
Advanced but to be able to catch that at
such a young age uh is is going to make
an enormous difference in course
correction so had he not had that
calcium scan done and acted on it uh
there's virtually no question in my mind
he would have died prematurely yeah so I
was going to ask so if that isn't a
driver or isn't being driven by his diet
is it purely just genetic luck of the
draw yes okay so in the book you tell a
story of somebody that came to you they
had just the worst deck of cards or hand
of cards that you could be dealt around
uh cognitive
decline well as in the they had the
worst I mean they didn't have the worst
fortunately they had you know a very bad
hand dealt to them Visa the risk of
Alzheimer's disease so how do you if you
get a rough deck hand I keep calling
deck you get a rough hand like that uh
what do you
do um you start acting as early as
possible to mitigate the risk so we know
what one we we have a really good sense
of things that people can do to reduce
the risk of Alzheimer's disease and in
this particular woman's case I call her
Stephanie that's not her real name um we
we undertake a number of things uh with
respect to sleep stress uh nutrition
exercise supplements that we know are
correcting certain deficiencies such as
elevated homosysteine levels um
and
unfortunately in her case fortunately
because she's so young but unfortunately
for many people we don't have
pharmacologic strategies yet so we're
just I think on the precipice of sort of
some Precision medicine ideas so for
example in our high-risk patients who
have this Gene the apoe4 gene we are
using a new test called the c2n test
that measures plasma
Amid and we're using plasma ameloid as a
biomarker for the first time now to
track interventions so in other words we
are using drugs exercise nutrition Etc
to try to lower plasma ID in high-risk
people talk to me about drugs like this
is one thing Statin comes up a couple
times in the book I I the only drug I
take is an
antihistamine and I would stop doing
that if I could figure out what it is
either in my diet or my environment
that's giving me the allergies uh but
I've had it across like seven different
places that I've lived different states
like I mean it just doesn't seem to
matter um I've had wildly varying diets
doesn't seem to impact it anyway so I
take an allergy medication um and then
I'll sometimes supplement vitamin D but
other than that I I just have a real
hesitation to take any supplementation
whatsoever um but you don't seem to have
the same fear I have of an isolated
compound so you get people on statins if
they have early signs of heart disease
not necessarily I mean when it comes to
managing apob which is the thing we're
trying to manage on the lipid side um we
have a lot of classes of drugs statins
are one class of drug that's one way to
lower Apo be is to use a Statin statins
also happen to have the most side
effects of any class of drug that lower
lipids in fact all the other classes of
drugs that lower lipids have no side
effects statins really have the worst
side effects by far so you might say
well why do we even tolerate statins
like why would we even use them we use
them because we have the most data for
them they are very efficacious though
not the most
efficacious um and they may have some
other benefits that go beyond their apob
lowering benefit so all of that has to
kind of be weighed and you have to weigh
that against the downside of Statin
which are that a non-trivial subset of
people um have at least one of two
problems in the presence of a Statin one
they get muscle soreness the other
problem is paradoxically their glucose
metabolism Goes to Hell h u not entirely
clear Why by the way but we see
disregulated glucose metabolism in a
small subset of patients on statins and
again we see in a small small subset of
those patients about 5% muscle soreness
so if we have those symptoms or signs in
a person on a Statin and we've chosen a
Statin as part of the solution in this
lipid lowering campaign we just
discontinue it and can it reverses like
that but when you prescribe somebody a
drug do you do that only when it's like
they
cannot uh address this via diet and
exercise yeah it depends so um it
depends on several things so certain so
exercise has very little bearing on
lipids it has no clinically meaningful
benefit on lipids has a much better
clinical benefit on metabolic health and
blood pressure which are also very
important in controlling heart disease
so we care a lot about exercise because
we want to control those other things
that drive heart disease the big three
by the way are smoking high blood
pressure and high apob so um we again
we're trying to do all of this in
concurrent fashion as opposed to just
you know playing lacko on one thing
um but nutrition has a
relatively um minor role outside of
extremes at controlling apob um once a
person once you get a person sort of
insulin sensitive uh and once you've
normalized their
triglycerides unless you're willing to
go on profound fat restriction it's very
difficult to get apob in the levels that
we deem appropriate for um true
prevention would you rather put them on
profound fat reduction or generally not
because it usually comes at such a high
cost what's that cost uh usually it they
end up getting insulin resistant because
you're now putting them on a very high
carbohydrate diet and they're usually
protein
malnourished why would that be true so
it just is a function of what they're
eating so for two years so I used to be
60 pounds heavier to lose the 60 PBS I
basically just ate chicken breast and
broccoli and while not fun because I was
also calorically calorically restricting
so hard uh it was fine yeah and if that
works that's that would that be
preference though over a drug here's
what I say no the answer is no what I
say is diet is a way harder problem to
get right than drug so let's get the
diet right first let's come up with the
diet that works best for your metabolic
Health your muscle mass your
um your sort of fat distribution and
your
sanity diet is really hard to get right
maybe not for you you're kind of a you
know a highly disciplined person but for
most of us we want to make sure that we
can put you on a diet that you're you're
able to stay with for the Long Haul
we're not compromising muscle mass we're
not compromising metabolic health so if
that Diet also happens to produce very
low apob because it's highly restrictive
in fat
fantastic stay the course in my clinical
experience taking care of lots of
patients that's not the case for most
people for most people the diet that
produces optimal muscle mass really good
metabolic health and is something that
they can tolerate for a long period of
time it's not sufficiently reduced in
fat enough to have a meaningful impact
on their lipids and therefore if we want
to get apob low enough to really get
into major prevention territory we're
going to need a drug
M okay uh I'm not sure if it's more
enlightening to find out what stack of
drugs supplements you take or if based
on Horsemen that is likely to kill you I
have people on these but I am curious
what what do you take are you on Rapa
metformin anything like that um I do
take Rapa I do not take
Metformin um I do take uh a lipid
lowering drug take two lipid lowering
drugs so one of them is called ratha
it's a pcsk9 inhibitor so it's an
injectable drug that um prevents the
degradation of LDL receptors on the
liver so that's specific very specific
so it's a very clean drug has no side
effects uh Works incredibly well it's
the most potent lipid lowering drug we
have did you have a genetic predeliction
to something that made this necessary I
mean I I just only that I have a genetic
pred predilection to heart disease my
family history is abysmal for heart
disease so um you know once that came
into Focus for me I was very clear that
I was going to do anything and
everything to at least take that off the
table right um and that basically means
not smoking not an issue having low to
normal blood pressure fortunately not an
issue and having physiologic
concentrations of apob meaning lowering
my apob to the level of a child okay and
you are you able to get to that or is
that what this injectable is for I use
these drugs to do that got it does rap
ayon help with that no so what's rap ay
about explain what it does to people um
well I I think that's that's a bit of a
TBD right now I mean we we know what it
does in the on label use so on label use
of rap ay which is you know taking kind
of a medium dose every single day is an
immuno is an immunosuppressive dose and
that's how rapamycin was approved in
1999 by the FDA for use in uh patients
with solid organ transplants so when you
have an organ of somebody else put into
you your immune system naturally wants
to destroy that organ so patients who
get uh organ transplants kidneys or
livers or hearts or things like that
they have to be on a cocktail of drugs
to suppress their immune system
specifically their tea cells which are
the um uh cells that would normally be
going after viruses but now they're
going after the organ so um that's
nothing to really do with how we're
thinking about rapy as we're thinking
about rapy through the lens of what's
called Jiro protection which means you
don't really have a very specific
disease you're treating you're more
broadly targeting the process of Aging
at the cellular level and there um based
on a lot of animal data that's very
compelling it appears that Romy does
indeed provide gero protection um but
it's very unclear as to how to dose it
to get that um and how you dose it in a
mouse probably isn't how you should dose
it in a human but we don't really know
um so if we don't know why am I doing it
yes yeah I guess I I'm I'm I'm steeped
reasonably well in the literature and I
have a strong enough
conviction that the way we're dosing it
for this purpose has a much higher
probability of being valuable than not
but I'm going to be very quick to abort
in the presence of new information just
as information that you see in the
literature in your blood both all of the
above new studies coming out you know
there's a very important study coming
out in three years um called the Aging
uh the dog aging project I believe it's
called yeah yeah mat kin y I had him on
the show yeah so so very interesting so
if I remember right from uh talking to
him basically were trying to get out of
mtor more or less which is my big fear
with my diet because I'm I eat so much I
mean so much has changed in my mind
since reading your book but I eat so
much protein animal protein specifically
I imagine I'm in mtor all the time and
so it was is tempting to try rap ay but
is that what's really going on uh not
really I mean well yes rap ayon is is an
inhibitor of mtor that's that's how the
drug Works um but it's
not when you eat protein the activation
of mtor is relatively
short so but if you're eating it all the
time wouldn't you then presumably just
constantly be stoking that fire not
necessarily I mean even if you eat like
I do which is no intermittent fasting
there's still 14 hours a day I'm eating
nothing right so um and again amino
acids do not stick around very long in
circulation so you know you're they're
coming on they're stimulating mtor and
then they're gone um
if if if mtor if if um ramy's benefit is
through mtor inhibition
specifically um it's probably more
through the inhibition of chronic
elevation okay and who knows there may
be tissue specificity it may be more
about what it's doing in one part of you
know in one tissue versus another might
not be in the muscle it might be in the
liver um there there are a lot of
unanswered questions here which is why I
think the work Matt is doing is is
really important it's very difficult to
imagine immortality when you untether
and uncouple the uh not dying part with
the preservation of Health span so
specifically cognitive Performance and
Physical performance and I think more
about those things now than I probably
ever have before I think a lot about
sort of the physical stuff so what does
it really mean to be a 100 but function
like a well to do 50 to 60y old and and
even if you're alive how happy would you
be I mean it would be I think for many
people it would be quite frustrating or
you know if you had grandkids or great
grandkids and you couldn't play with
them or you couldn't tie your shoe I
mean we actually use tying a shoe as one
of the metrics to evaluate sort of
flexibility and and certain physical
performance so most people our age don't
think of tying their shoe as a physical
performance and yet when you would start
to lose those things I think you'd have
a radically different View of you know
what am I doing but how do you get there
and and look perform and feel like the
way we imagine a 60 yearold today a fit
six-year old because I know some
six-year-olds that are just amazing
right so how do you how do you take that
to 100 and what would have to happen for
us like what do we really need to figure
out is this uh um flexibility problem
joints burning out problem ATP problem
like what what's the B good question um
so far my my exploration into this topic
has has suggested a couple of things so
one is we do tend to disproportionately
load joints over muscles so in an ideal
world you would want to figure out a way
to exercise where you can maximally load
the muscle while minimally loading the
joint so there is a lot of joint failure
that becomes problematic I mean and I'm
separating the obvious which is there's
just too many people who aren't
exercising enough or correctly at all
and so they're just sort of withering
away but if you come at this through the
lens of okay well what if we're dealing
with a subset of people who are
committed to figuring out how can they
exercise best in many ways it's just a
lack of specificity right so most people
who exercise can't actually tell you why
they're doing what they're doing the
99.9% of us who don't get paid to play a
sport and who aren't even really
competing at a serious level outside of
the professional ranks I don't think we
know what our sport is and I think the
sport should be being the most Kick-Ass
100y old that ever lived so what would
that look like like what does it mean to
be the most kickass 100y old and I think
you have to then reverse engineer all of
the things one should be able to do so a
kickass 100y old should be able to I I
don't know I'm making this up because I
haven't fully codified this yet but they
should certainly be able to carry two 25
lb bags from a grocery store they should
be able to lift a 30 or 40 lb bag over
their head to put it in a you know
compartment of an airport of an airplane
they should be able to have a you know
25b little terror run at them you know
IE great-grandchild or dip down into a
squat and grab them and pick them up
they should be able to jump down on the
floor and play with cars or dolls and
stand up without assistance and if you
start to map out the 25 or 35 things
that becomes a new decathlon MH so
instead of saying the decathlon is
running this distance jumping this far
swimming this far it's like great those
are kind of arbitrary now we're going to
come up with like real world things that
you have to be able to do when you're
100 if you want to live what I would
describe as potentially a more
fulfilling physical life to enjoy the
fruits of having not died by that point
in your life all right so how do we
build towards that I love this by the
way like I always tell people I want to
live forever I'm well aware that as of
right now I'm going to die um so my
thing is how do we stay alive long
enough to give time for these step
function breakthroughs to happen so what
do I do like what are the things that I
train or the hormone replacement
therapies that I need to go what do I
need to watch what are those things that
I should be doing taking a step back I
would say three years ago 80 to 90% of
my energy went into how to not die which
basically strategy yeah which is tan
amount to how do you delay the onset of
chronic disease so the mathematical
equivalent of longevity from a lifespan
perspective is creating a phase shift in
disease onset if you want to live to 100
it basically means you have to delay the
onset by about two decades of every
major chronic disease so it doesn't mean
you can't get cancer or heart disease or
any of these other things but you better
figure out a way to get them 20 years
after the average person gets
them I would say now that occupies 50%
of my brain wave energy whatever and
much more time goes into two other
things which is how to minimize
suffering which is kind of an emotional
problem and then how to be this kickass
100y old so to the latter
um the model I have in my mind is that
of sort of Bruce Lee Bruce Lee sort of
looked at each and every discipline of
Martial artarts including boxing and
wrestling and things like that and said
let me extract from each of these
disciplines that which I believe is
useful discard those that I think are
useless and create a perfect fighting
form that is truly geared towards
self-defense so it is not a sport there
is no tournament there is no rank there
is no belt there is no Sensei it is can
you handle yourself in a life or death
situation my wife Lisa struggled
profoundly with her gut health and
experienced debilitating stomach pain so
I focused my energy on learning
everything I could about the human gut
viome is on The Cutting Edge of this
growing area of study with their atome
gut intelligence test just 2 to 3 weeks
after sending in your sample you can see
your results on 20 Integrative Health
tests that measure your inflammatory
activity metabolic Fitness and the
health of your gut lining as a special
offer to my viewers viome is offering
$110 off your test just go to try
bom.com
impact and use code impact to get the
$110 off if I go to a yoga class or if I
do a pilates class invariably there's
something in there that I think is
really valuable and truthfully there's a
bunch of stuff that I'm like I don't
need this this is just if I had infinite
time this would be fine to do but I
don't have infinite time so now you
apply a constraint to the problem which
is not only do you want to be sort of
the best 100-year-old imaginable what if
you're only willing to spend 10 to 12
hours a week preparing for that and so
you say okay well so there's a new sport
which we Define some of the parameters
of that's your new Olympics and that
Olympics is 50 years from now how will
you train for it if you're only willing
to spend 10 to 12 hours a week training
for it well my guess is you will take a
lot of things from various disciplines
discard a lot of things and sort of have
to build a very bespoke routine around
it that will involve the maintenance of
muscle mass joint integrity flexib
ability uh functional movement balance
things that we don't even really think
about anymore how many times does
someone who's 90 fall because they've
lost their balance and it's that fall
that ultimately leads to their demise
how much of that the balancing do you
think is neurological and how much is
physical they're just not doing enough
physical [__] to figure out to maintain
that my guess is it's probably both
there's a stability issue that starts to
go away as you age also the consequences
of a fall become much more apparent so
um it's probably not just the case that
someone who's older Falls that much more
it might be that the the severity of the
injury becomes so much more severe so
right now if I were walking here and I
tripped on that stair and fell you know
maybe on a really really bad day I break
my wrist but most likely nothing happens
uh in 50 years if I do that same thing
the probability that something bad
happens is going to be much greater um
but that said I already tell my balance
is not what it was when I was 20 when I
was 15 I mean I used to do I used to be
able to do this exercise when I was 15
where I would do a with blindfolded I
could do a single leg squat with the
with the non-s squatting leg straight
out in front of me so I could go all the
way to the floor and all the way up arms
crossed blindfolded I could do 20 each
leg I can't do that once today with my
eyes
open so admittedly I'm nowhere near as
strong as I used to be so there's a
strength component but I also just
clearly the balance and so so the
question is now maybe that activity is a
bit over you know that's just
unnecessary um and again I don't know
what the answer is I don't know if this
means I need to get out there and
practice on a tight RPP or something
like but there's there's something that
needs to be done
so every time I do some sort of really
wellth thought out workout I find myself
thinking God like some percentage of
this is so essential all of those things
need to be put into this new discipline
this new sport which is called for lack
of a better word being a kickass
100-year-old I definitely like the sport
now one thing that I found really
interesting is so people complain a lot
about lower back pain talking about
unnecessarily loading the lumbar um I've
found that if I don't deadlift my lower
back hurts not if I do deadlift now some
of that probably that I have decent form
it's certainly not exceptional but I
have decent form I know how to avoid
injury um but it is so weird to me that
doing nothing will end up causing me
pain in my lower back but if I'm
religious and I'm doing it you know once
or twice a week every week I feel
Bulletproof the advantage of deadlifting
and squatting to me is uh they reveal
all of your errors in movement right
like they are I don't know how to
describe it but you can't hide from
those movements like you can't take bad
form into those things and not get
revealed right so I like that the
question is is it an unnecessary risk
right am I one bad deadlift away from
doing something stupid where and and
again I you know I'm as empathetic and
in love with those movements as anybody
but I also don't know if I need to do
that to be the best version of myself as
a hundred-year-old so the stuff I've
been doing for the last four to six
weeks um I basically haven't had more
than 155 lbs on my back in 6 weeks and
but by changing the form of what I'm
doing and making everything a single leg
movement uh so a lot of curtsy squats
lateral lunges incredibly strict lunges
where you are so specifically loading
the the front leg
glute I got to tell you like I'm not and
then doing a lot of single leg body
weight
squats but with meticulous form so that
I'm fully loading the glute not
overloading the quad which is my
absolute common Mistake by doing these
things I don't feel like I've lost a
step but I absolutely know I'm loading
myself less now the question is does
that matter and I don't think I know the
answer yet so unfortunately I feel like
I'm still too early in this process to
know what the Finish Line looks like and
there's other problems that we haven't
even touched on right like what V2 Max
and what aerobic base are necessary as a
minimum
threshold yeah talk to me about that cuz
I hate cardio but it's one of those if I
have to to have the kind of longevity
then so it and and and the term cardio
is itself so confusing right because
even if you think of what is V2 Max I
mean most people think well that's
really a a heart lung issue it's
actually not it's more of a muscle issue
interesting because that's where the the
bottleneck is not in how much oxygen can
you get in your
lungs the bottleneck is how much can
your muscles utilize so when you look at
you know the winner of the tour to
France or you know the gold medalist in
you know cross country skiing or the
person who wins the Boston Marathon like
when you when you look at the most
extreme endurance athletes who have
these very high V2 Maxes what's unique
about these people is their muscles
which is counterintuitive because
they're usually very slender individuals
but their muscles are so efficient at
aerobic metabolism that they are able to
extract so much oxygen out of blood when
you and I you know are at our maximum
capacity we're still breathing out you
know 80% of the oxygen we breathe in so
it's really not a gas exchange problem
it's a muscle problem that said V2 Max
is a very specific energy system that
probably gets a little more credit than
it deserves so what are the Alternatives
well um so so V2 Max is really as its
name suggests it is so the definition is
what is your maximal extraction or
utilization of oxygen the way to
experience what that is is go out and
run for four minutes as hard as you
possibly can yeah that is that Energy
System but there are other Energy
Systems right there are in cycling we
talk about seven different Energy
Systems but again you can really
simplify this and say there's sort of
the Energy System we're in right now
which is the smoking and joking Energy
System at the far under end of the
spectrum is this neuromuscular area
where you're basically doing the most
explosive movement imaginable for you
know 10 to 15
seconds and I suspect that for each of
those
Energy Systems there's an there's a
minimum threshold that you'd want to be
above as you age so ways that you could
test that would be I mean any even
someone our age probably knows if you
carry two bags of groceries up four
flights of stairs most people are
feeling that very few people get to the
top of that fourth I know that because
that's my apartment it's on the fourth
floor so like in New York I'm always
that you know I'm always paying
attention to like what will happen when
when the day comes that this is not
pleasant like when I'm deciding I have
to take the elevator up these four
flights of stairs um and so if that
becomes the minimum threshold then you
and and that you want to be there at 100
then you need to be there at 60 and you
need to be there at 50 and you need to
be there at 40 and so I think part of it
is just defining those things and that
determines then what's the level of
training you need to do but I do think
in this current environment of everybody
loving high-intensity interval training
which I love just as much as the next
person that's really only training one
Energy System and I think you if you
ignore these other Energy Systems you're
you're sort of not fully optimizing
around your performance Translating that
to this new sport this 100-year-old
kickass sport I think it's just going to
require a little more thought I'm
talking to orthopedic surgeons and
saying okay talk to me about the
injuries that are killing people um
because there's two types of Orthopedic
injuries that kill people there's fast
death and slow death so fast death is
patient falls in you know within a day
or so is dead from whatever the injury
was so they you know break their femur
they have a fat embolism they're dead or
they fall and they hit their head and
they you know have a cerebrovascular
accident they're
dead um but then there's also the slow
deaths right and these ones are to me
far less talked about but in many ways
more tragic um so so one of my closest
friends his father died recently um 89
years old complications of Alzheimer's
disease he'd been diagnosed eight months
before he died so in some senses you
could say well the good news is he was
spared he and his family were spared a
lot of suffering because you know he's
diagnosed in January he died in
August but when I went home for the
funeral I was sort of struck by how
difficult it had been for him since he
was 81 the two things he loved most in
life which were Golf and tending to his
yard he couldn't do because of more
chronic Orthopedic injuries so he spent
the last decade of his life kind of
watching TV
and to me that's the thing we have to be
able to avoid and uh you know for me I
don't know what it's going to be when
I'm 100 but I know that today if I had
to start saying if someone said well you
can't drive a race car and you can't
shoot a bow and arrow and you can't lift
weights doesn't doesn't matter how heavy
it is right but you can't do these
movements or you can't lay on the floor
to play uh if i s if I had to give those
things up I'm not sure how much I'd want
to kick around and so talking to these
orthopedic surgeons is giving me a real
insight into where those failures are
coming from and the single most
important Insight I've gained from them
is something you alluded to at the
outside which is just joint
overload you know so much of what we do
is even while trying to be good meaning
trying to exercise new these things is
just disproportionately taking on rest
so for I'll give you one silly example
right a military press is there a time
and a place for a military press
absolutely does it have any role in my
life absolutely not right why not first
of all I don't need to load my spine in
that way and if I could get 80% of the
benefit that I get out of a military
press by doing loaded activities below
my shoulder line below my neck and using
more static loaded Mo movements above
and that gives me 80% of the benefit at
20% of the risk that's exactly the kind
of compromise I'm willing to make and
yet I don't think we're applying that
level of risk reward to how we exercise
cancer I don't know if people are more
afraid of Dementia or cancer but both of
those are pretty terrifying from in
terms of ways to go out uh with cancer
we've I forget how long we've been the
war on cancer we've made precious little
progress are we barking up the wrong
tree like what what is it that either
makes that so hard like if we know what
it is why is it so hard to deal with and
if we don't know what it is why do you
think that's evaded our eye for so
long well it's it's a really good
question um you're right that we have
made scant process in the most important
metric of cancer which is overall
survival so if you think about it for
everybody who gets cancer we should be
asking the question How likely is it
that they will not die of the cancer
that they just
got um another way to think about that
is How likely are they to be alive in 10
years if you're alive in 10 years after
getting cancer that cancer is unlikely
to be the thing that kills you um and by
that that
metric we've only made about a 5 to 8%
Improvement in 50 plus years
whoa and that Improvement has been
largely in some very specific cancers so
that's not like across the board we've
gotten a bit better it's like no we got
a lot better in a couple of cancers
namely leukemias and certain
lymphomas couple of other esoteric
cancers like testicular cancer
and aside from that we haven't really
gotten better uh now very recently
there's some exciting news that does
seem more applicable to a slightly
broader array of cancers which is the a
form of therapy called immunotherapy so
unleashing the immune system to fight
Some solid organ tumors has also proved
to be and some leukemia lymphomas has
proved to be quite promising but we
still haven't figured out a way to
unleash that against every Cancer um
even though in theory should work right
every Cancer should have at least some
mutations on it that the immune system
could recognize as non-self and we know
for certain that 80% of them do in fact
80% of cancers solid organ cancers so
these are the ones that are killing the
majority of people right so breast
cancer prostate cancer lung cancer colon
cancer Etc um 80% of those cancers have
what are called novel neoantigens on
them meaning they have antigens on them
that are novel to the cancer and
recognizable by the host's own immune
system the problem is there aren't
enough tea cells to recognize it to
mount a sufficient immune response so
the real challenge of cancer therapy
today in my view is going to be
enhancing that problem that process
rather in other words I think most of
the attention on cancer should be on how
do we create more reactive antigens in
cancer and how do we enhance and extend
the longevity of te- cells to attract
that um so I'm I'm actually surprisingly
more optimistic now about this than I
was even when I started writing the book
because of what I'm seeing with a class
of drugs called checkpoint Inhibitors
and also for um what I'm seeing with
interesting clinical trials where we're
seeing the pairing of checkpoint
Inhibitors which are immune modulators
and conventional chemotherapy drugs
which take tumors that are not
previously susceptible to this immune
modulation but then create mutations
that then make them
susceptible really clever and cool stuff
I I I think I write about a couple of
examples of that in the um cancer
chapter so
um it's it's easy to be sort of
pessimistic about cancer because of how
poorly it has gone for the past 50 years
but I think the next 10 years look a lot
better than the last 50 H because of
things that are already in motion yeah
because of these processes that are in
motion so if you got diagnosed with
cancer what would be like step number
one you what kind of cancer is it uh is
it one that responds to immunotherapy is
there like a protocol that you would
walk down no it would be entirely
dependent on what the cancer was but you
know so that gets to kind of step two of
my thinking on cancer which is uh is the
the unequivocal
unambiguous understanding that your odds
for treating cancer go down the more
cancer cells you have in your body so
detecting it sooner in the book you talk
about you for your patients you lower
the age of colonoscopy we do everything
much more aggressively so we you know
we're we're doing we're doing
colonoscopy much earlier much more
frequently we're doing how often would
you do a colonoscopy oh it depends on
the individual I mean in me I do it
every 3 years really yeah and then I do
stool based testing in between what do
you check for on the stool you're
looking for fecal DNA so you're looking
for DNA of colon cancer yeah
interesting how it has its own DNA what
are we looking for yeah you're looking
for the DNA that's shedding from a tumor
tumors have DNA other than it's not my
own DNA it is your own but it's mutated
I mean by definition every I mean cancer
is a genetic disease right so cancer by
definition has mutations that render it
different from the host cell in a way
that's predictable uh yeah that's we
know what breaks in
DNA yeah we know what's we we're
sampling what's normal because we see
the abundance of that and then we're
looking at what's different from is
there anything abnormal very that's what
a is how would you do that like the
sequencing of that sounds like a
nightmare not anymore I mean you can
sift through that many samples oh my God
Next Generation sequencing can do this
stuff like it's
it's simple how many sequences would you
have to do in a single feal sample to
figure out if there's one like is it a,
100 10 um I think what maybe a better
question is what's the Frequency with of
abnormal cells that can be detected in
the presence of normal and and and
that's a good question I don't know in
feal uh I don't know in the fecal test I
know in the blood test it could be one
in a
million do you guys speaking of feces uh
do you guys look at the microbiome at
all no really what don't know what to do
with it yet nobody knows what to do with
it anybody who says they know what to do
with it is probably trying to sell you a
supplement that is probably
true uh okay so I'm startled meaning
look there's no doubt that the
microbiome is an is an important part of
human health like we're not I'm not
sitting here denying that or saying the
Earth is flat there's no doubt that your
diet plays an enormous impact on the
microbiome there's no doubt that you
know a course of antibiotics will alter
like all of these things are true but
we're still left with the so what
question it I've yet to see an example
of where someone can show me that I have
a person in whom I detect a problem I
check their
microbiome I make an intervention in
response to it that I wouldn't have
otherwise made that fixes the problem
wow I just don't see those examples okay
so man this is very interesting and
important to my life so I think we
talked about this before my wife seven
years ago now I think had a threshold
event where she went from having a
manageable gut issue to I was
legitimately afraid she was going to die
her hair was falling out her nails are
breaking she couldn't keep anything down
she was in agony at times on the floor
couldn't be picked up I was just really
really brutal she had to do things like
swallow cameras colonoscopy endoscopy
like I mean she did [__] everything
and this was long enough ago 7 years
that uh a lot of doctors only sort of
knew what a microbiome was like they
didn't know anything about it they only
sort of knew that it existed and so they
couldn't come up with any answers and it
was only through finally getting her
tested realizing she didn't have enough
diversity realizing what we're going to
have to do to start building that
diversity back it was a very long
journey of figuring out what the things
were that she was responding to um
dietary enzymes probiotics prebiotics I
mean just like this whole arsenal now it
may just be oh we didn't actually and
and to be honest we don't know which of
those things worked and she's said many
because she takes like 26 supplements a
day or something she's like I don't do I
still need to take them all she's like I
have no idea so she just keeps doing
what she's doing and we don't know the
counterfactual in these situations and
and I guess what I'm what do you mean by
that we don't know what would have
happened if you did something different
yes very true so that this is the
problem with this space is we don't have
clinical trials upon which to extract
knowledgeable or reliable information
why I don't know probably because there
isn't enough financial incentive for the
industries that typically want to do
this right like if you're an unregulated
industry which is the supplement
industry what incentive do you have to
do a clinical trial you don't require it
to sell your product all you need is
marketing so that's why no supplement
company is out there trying to run a
clinical trial clinical trials are only
run by drug companies because they can't
sell their product without a gold
standard of a clinical trial so for as
much as people want to kind of poo poo
drugs and R yayay yay supplements they
should really be thinking about this in
the other way the burden of proof is
much higher on a supplement in the sense
that we have no clue if it works let
alone if it's not harmful at least the
FDA for all of its faults and you won't
find many people that are more critical
of the FDA than I am I think it's on the
verge of being a corrupt organization at
least it tries to hold drug companies to
some level of efficacy and safety it
doesn't always do it but at least it's
trying at least they're going through
those motions no one's even trying to do
that with supplements I mean the
supplement industry is such a filthy
disgusting industry that even though I
take supplements I stress more about
sourcing those than I would ever stress
about sourcing Pharma H okay so in other
words you got to be really careful where
you're getting your supplements so if
I'm using a probiotic which I do during
allergy season interesting a probiotic
why you know I I live in a part of the
world where there are really wicked
allergies and I don't want to get them
so I've talked to a few allergists and
I've said look what can I do
prophylactically during this season in
Austin where Cedar fever is out of
control and they say well we don't
recommend doing immunotherapy until you
actually develop the allergy blah blah
blah blah blah but a couple of them have
said look we recommend this probiotic we
think it might slightly enance you know
this element of your immune response and
I'm kind of like okay I if there's a 5%
chance it works and it's not going to
hurt me I'll take the chance because the
only thing I'm doing is wasting money
but like I don't find that to be a I
mean I do it somewhat reluctantly right
it's so interesting to me that the
microbiome would play a role in
allergies I mean I get it because so
much of the immune system's there but
it's just it's such a unexpected twist
turn of events for me um even just the
discovery that so much my immune system
resides in my gut was already
startling yeah it's it's it I mean again
I think the microbiome is interesting
and I really hope we get to the point
where we know how to manipulate it um
are you do you look at the research on
that or are you waiting for something
more stable to come oh I intermittently
do but but I don't follow that research
nearly as closely as what I'm following
other things so it's it's sort of like
like every year I'll go back and do a
little dive into it with the team and
say okay what is there anything we know
today and you know year upon year upon
year we kind of come back to the same
conclusion which is nothing to nothing
exciting to report yet I mean there are
edge cases right so feal transplantation
obviously very efficacious in some
people um do you worry about fmt um I
mean there are huge risks associated
with it as you know so it's it's it's
it's something that should only be done
when the risks are justified by the
alternative of not doing it yeah we were
maybe a month away from me doing fecal
microbial transplant with Lisa cuz I was
just like this is scary yeah
understandable but for reasons of it
just felt like blood transfusions from
like the 70s or something where it's
like are they scanning for the right
things
like very terrifying so what would you
have done if I had come to you with Lisa
and said hey uh she's always had gut
problems I would have sent you to
someone who who does that like again I'm
not saying that who though like nobody
seems to know like when I say we
finally even I couldn't resolve it for
her as much as I was learning and
meeting with experts like she finally
just had to be like when I eat this what
do I feel when I eat this what do I feel
yeah I mean again this is not my area of
expertise so I wouldn't act like it was
um you know I you'd be like I don't know
yeah I'm really happy telling people I
don't know there's a there's there's
more things I don't know than I do know
yeah that is uh that's something that a
lot of people struggle with I definitely
fall into the other camp where I feel
like I know just enough to be like do
this come back report so it was really
interesting reading your book seeing how
much of the things that I felt like uh
in fact I'll say this another way I am
I'm I'm I have a weird emotional hang-up
like I really want to I wanted to say
the sentence that I'm going to stop
doing intermittent fasting and and start
doing what you're talking about and I
probably should uh do I have orthorexia
this is a very interesting
question I feel it's so easy for me to
maintain my body composition through
intermittent fasting it's very easy for
me to maintain my uh my satiety through
intermittent fasting it's when I click
over into ketosis I find that my
relationship to hunger is different but
you did say that that if I'm doing it
for body composition reasons fair enough
that's very interesting so one thing
that I know I'm just thinking out loud
here one thing that I um I do often
wonder about with with my own physique
is protein intake and muscle
hardness when you like when I'm being
really consistent with working out and I
take my carbs up my muscles get really
hard will I have a similar effect by and
you know why that is right uh the
glycogen is being pushed into the
muscles it's more water right so more
carbs means more glycogen every molecule
glycogen is bringing three molecules of
water so you're you're filling up the
muscle Okay so then is there none of
that relevance with protein because I
was going to say like it's different
right so so protein is contributing to
the sarir the functional unit of the
muscle the the that's that's that's the
part that's Contracting right that's the
functional piece of the muscle so that's
what's increasing the synthesis of the
muscle and that obviously contributes to
size uh but it contributes just as much
to function um but creatine you know
will add size to muscle through water
retention carbohydrates will add
glycogen and water to muscle these
things are important for performance
also by the way so they're not just an
aesthetic thing so carbohydrates uh
creatine water protein synthesis all of
this matters to
muscle if I were eating more protein
would you expect uh my muscles to feel
more firm what uh am I going to be able
to increase my strength more like it
assuming that I hold my workouts the
same cuz I'm trying I'm trying to think
through do I change my diet or do I just
keep doing what I'm doing now what I'm
doing now is easy but I always thought I
was it depends I don't know how you're
working out so I don't know right now
what you're limited by are you limited
by amino acids or are you limited by
Progressive overload or are you limited
by some other Factor so meaning I'm not
overloading the muscle enough yeah are
you over are you putting enough stress
on the muscle or not do you have a high
enough testosterone or not do you have
enough amino acid or not any of those
things can be the bottleneck um and are
you at the limit of your genes right
like all of these things start to matter
now my guess is virtually nobody is at
the limit of their genes except for
bodybuilders so I'm not at the limit of
my genes what am I at the limit of right
now probably and I'm not at the limit of
protein anymore I'm probably at the
limit of how hard I'm willing to train
how much I'm willing to train and
actually I'm probably at the limit of
testosterone as well because my tea is
pretty low so I can't answer the
question for you what is more protein
going to do because I would need a lot
more information to understand like how
your train what's your training volume
what's your training intensity and you
know all those factors okay so one thing
while I have you that I I will say is my
limitation when I think about what holds
my physique back I get injured a lot and
I get injured in a very specific
repeatable way which I think has to do
with stability which you cover in the
book so um I have a very weak middle
back and and I compensate for everything
by shrugging my traps so it almost
doesn't matter what I'm doing I brushing
my teeth I will suddenly realize Jesus
and I have to like remind myself to I
think it's uh retract my scapular like I
I'm pulling that sort of midback girdle
down um in the book you go into how you
can rewire the way that your brain has
learned to to control your musculature
what what is that process I have injured
my trap you're going to think I'm
exaggerating I've injured my trap 115
times over the 20 years when you say
injured your trap same scented into
spasm so where I can't turn my head or I
can't tilt my head uh literally last
night in bed I was rolling over so just
adjusting my posture and it went and I
was like you've got to be [__]
kidding and so then I couldn't fall back
asleep because I could just feel it
tightening and tightening and tightening
and tightening um that is the thing that
has has held me back for forever it's
the first injury I ever received the the
first day in the gym doing an overhead
press it went and I thought I was dying
at that point I was like what the [__]
uh yeah I've injured it probably at
least 15 times again it would be
impossible for me to kind of give you
the diagnostic here but I think I think
if you think about the way I kind of go
through that stability chapter um it
start it starts with respiration so the
first thing we'd have to understand is
what's your respiratory strategy
um so are you overinflated underinflated
chest breathing only abdomen breathing
only all of these things um are you
chest out are you hunched over like
you'd want to go through how do you
correct your your respiration strategy
um and then you'd want to look at do you
have for example segmental control of
your spine most people do not I can't
imagine yeah so until you have segmental
control of the spine you are always
going to disproportionately put Force at
various hinge points in the spine do you
have thoracic mobility of your spine
sounds like you don't have thoracic
Mobility the spine do you have scap what
is thoracic Mobility so are you able to
rotate through the thoracic spine so you
have a cervical spine thoracic spine is
the longest segment and then the lumbar
spine um so most people don't have
segmental control people that like twist
themselves on a chair that kind of thing
like how would you do that yeah but if
you do twist where are you twisting
through where is the torsion what part
of the spine for me almost certainly
lower back exactly that would be the
most common so most people are
excessively applying torsion in the
lumbar spine and you want to be able to
dissipate it through the whole spine
also when you talk about the flexion
extension of the spine and by the way we
made a bunch of videos like because you
can't explain all this stuff in words so
in the book there's a link to like
videos where I go through what these
things look like um but you know being
able to do a segmental cat Cow exercise
is a really good way to see if you have
segmental control control of extension
and flexion of the spine from head to
tail um so you know then we get into
sort of do you have scapular control
through the full range of motion through
all four phases so protraction
retraction elevation depression again
very few people can can control their
scapula through those things so
stability and movement are uh you know
intertwined very intimately and if you
you know if you're trying to unpack
these injuries you generally have to go
back to the breath training how to train
yourself how to breathe properly
training yourself how to move properly
and there are two schools of thought
that I have relied on very heavily in my
journey here and that of my patients and
that one is called Dynamic neuromuscular
stabilization DNS the other is called
postural restoration Institute PRI
bringing everything that I've learned
from this conversation and the book
today tell me if this makes sense
so I I would like to add more muscle to
my frame do you know how much muscle
mass you have right now I don't have you
had a dexa scan I haven't man I'm really
like I love that stuff but because no
one's coming to my house to do it uh I
haven't gotten test it it'd be very
interesting you can't do it at your
house you kind of have to go to the
machine I'm I'm willing to do it I would
be very keen to figure that out one I
want to see if I have any you should get
a Baseline and you should you know you
should figure out like where you are
where do you stack up right now in terms
of muscle mass if for no other reason
then you can evaluate your progress if
you let's say you you know you test your
almi it's at the 70th percentile that's
great but do you want it to be at the
80th percentile well this way you can
figure out if the changes you're making
are going to move you in the right
direction or not all right so making my
goal maybe even more broad is something
you talk about in the book which is the
centenarian
decathalon uh so what are the things you
want to be able to do when you're older
you better be scoring very high on them
depending on what part of your age
you're in now because it's all going to
decline as you get older so here are the
things I feel like I should be
implementing based on I am 47 okay and
so what do you want to be able to
do 40 to 50 years from now I want to be
able to be very independent from a
Mobility perspective so I love the idea
of being able to um when I'm flying to
Mars to be able to hold I guess before
we Blast Off be able to put luggage
above my head mhm uh uh so yeah I want
to be able to travel put things above my
head I don't want to lose a lot of my
strength I want to and if you want to go
to Mars by the way you're going to have
to tolerate pretty high G forces so
think about the neck strength that's
going to be required to do that yes also
I would just like to not have constant
trap injuries that would be amazing y um
I want to be able to play video games
okay tell me I don't play video games I
do drive a simulator though so that's
probably similar uh I would guess not
from the perspective of what I struggle
with so I had so much wrist inflammation
for so long I think a lot about
inflammation inflammation keep that down
so you thank you by the way you're uh
encouraging me to add fat to my diet
allowed me to go from basically never
being able to play video games to I can
now play as much as I want on Saturday
which I mean I sure I could play more
than that but that's just from a Time
allocation standpoint so uh that's been
a huge win so being able to do that uh
sex huge thing in my life so being able
to whatever that takes uh so a certain
amount of flexibility I imagine uh
stamina etc etc
um yeah Aesthetics I want to look good I
want to be strong look strong
um something cognitive like being super
sharp that would be really important
well I mean if you're playing video
games presumably you've got to have
pretty decent cognition right you've got
to have um certain skills and um
depending on if you want to be doing
this yeah also true I don't need to pick
up Grand grandchilden that would be the
maybe one deviation from what a lot of
people want to be able to do but being
able to be physically active I mean take
sex is my like I want to be able to do
that to the fullest um so given all of
those things here is sort of how I see
this now breaking out um sleep which we
didn't really get into but I obviously
I'm going to need to get sleep that's
going to be super important um I'm going
to need to identify given my family
history I think it's either going to be
cancer or heart disease neither sort of
overwhelmingly
prevalent um but those would be the two
where grandparents died of that so
certainly want to be thoughtful about
that so I'd identified those two
Horsemen so I'm going to be really
thoughtful around my diet making sure
that I don't have fat spilling out uh
that I'm really thoughtful about the um
APO little a [__] APO B APO that's the
one that gets into my cell walls
arterial walls and do need to check your
LP ltil a which is the thing we talked
about as well that is genetic and occurs
in about 8% to 12% of people okay so uh
paying attention to my diet uh the
adjustment that I'm thinking about
making my diet I'm going to test not
doing intermittent fasting see what that
does for my muscle mass um eating more
protein I have a feeling I might be
lower in protein though I haven't
counted up the eggs I eat a lot of eggs
um and then I'm really curious to see
about cycling rap ay so what is your
cycle on rap Aon um I just dose it once
a week just take one dose once a week
yep okay very interesting um trying that
what other changes I feel like that's
you're going to have to have a doctor
help you with that that's that's not an
that's not an over-the-counter yeah yeah
yeah for sure for sure I obviously would
be doing this on the back of a lot of
blood testing to make sure that I um am
a that I know what my Baseline is B that
I'm actually getting the result that I
want to see um so yeah looking at the
number on the um the cholesterol that we
were talking about
earlier grip strength is it going to be
one again not you know not sitting
around with a little one of those like
little grip squeezers because that's not
really what it's about it's how do you
develop grip strength you develop it by
carrying heavy things right so you know
this morning I was dead lifting and
because I was doing it in the hotel and
I didn't have chalk I was failing in
grip today like it's actually funny my
hands and my forearms are still sore 5
hours later because I was really at the
limits of what I could do without chalk
and you know I didn't have anything else
so so but so yeah I was deadlifting but
think about how much I was doing for my
upper body even though that's a lower
body activity um you know doing farmer
carries something I love doing I mean
I'm always trying to figure out a way to
use my upper body to maximize the
relationship between grip and shoulder
so think of it less as like very
specific tests that you do um and think
of it more as the the broader activity
you need to do to produce that so grip
strength is just an integral of upper
body
strength all right so if if that is my
sort of fumbly way through the things
the changes that I'm going to make um if
somebody wants out live and they come to
you that cocktail party and you just
cannot get away from them and you have
to answer the question in a succinct way
um what do people need to do to maximize
the human life
expectancy there is no sentence I can
give any person to tell them what the
prescription is right I mean if I could
I wouldn't have written a 500 page book
there's no chance believe me I didn't
want to write
a I wasn't look I wasn't looking for
things to do right the reason this is
complicated is that it's complicated um
and two people can have two very
different prescriptions you know if I'm
at that cocktail party and the person
I'm talking to after a few minutes I
figure out that their biggest issue is
that they're not sleeping you know or
that you know they're sleeping four
hours a night nothing else I'm not going
to really waste time talking about
protein with them we've got to figure
out why they're not sleeping s to n
hours a night and how much of that is
sleep hygiene how much of that is
underlying pathology like sleep or
restless leg syndrome how much of that
is alcohol how much of that like you
have to you have to get to the root of
that problem but if you're sleeping 4
hours a night that's the elephant in the
room if you're not exercising at all and
you're sleeping well and you're sort of
eating okay like none of that other
stuff matters you need to get exercising
if you have type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome you know I we have to
get you exercising and changing your
diet and all those other things so so
again it it I'm not being difficult
because I don't want to give glib
answers I I'm not giving a GLI answer
because there isn't one if you want to
learn how waking up at 3:30 a.m. can
completely change your life be sure to
click here check it out your life will
change forever the moment that you
decide to get up early and really attack
your day go to bed at the same time
every
day